now found further confirmation of this surmise. the courtiers explained

wounded men as one might, it was evident that if they were given one
stands on the social ladder, the more people he is connected with
which not one battle had been won, and in which not a flag, or cannon,
“to the right from the corridor, euer hochgeboren! there you will find

to look for them, arrived to fetch natásha and pétya. the count and

gentlemen, it is already time for me to go,” replied prince andrew
he was told in russian, german, and czech by the crowd of fugitives who

wheel, which merged in her memory with what followed.)

beyond the niemen.”
represented by e, the very letter elided from the article le before the
“but how can i?...”
“but no, it can’t be!” he thought. “this stern, thin, pale face that
nothing to encourage zdrzhinski’s enthusiasm but, on the contrary,
“that’s a good thing, but don’t move from prince vasíli’s. it
is, do you see him? i’ve seen him twice, as i see you now. the little
vainly trying to master her agitation.
rights of man, is sentenced to...” but before pierre—who at that
see him at the same time as an adjutant who informed the count that the



chapter vi
“only, please let me command something, so that i may really command...”
had come straight from the bath... papa used to...”
or even two pieces with pleasure. for we feel how it is; but what’s all
director, could not refrain from reminding prince vasíli of his former
and leaning his head against her he began to cry.
french go to mexico. the king of prussia and bismarck issue decrees and

“how strange it is! it’s as if it were a dream! i like that.”
more strongly fortified than any other post? and why were all efforts


in the corner room at the club, members gathered to read these

at first, the hoarfrost on the dusty grass, the sparrow hills, and the
others. he was instinctively and thoroughly convinced that it was
felt himself at home in a quiet haven. in moscow he felt at peace, at
soul, and for that very reason had understood and assimilated the one
question that presents itself when examining each historical event. how
without undressing, and was awakened soon after midnight by a courier

and, as always happens, had got somewhere, but not to their appointed
“sergéy kuzmích—from all sides—” he said, unbuttoning the top

undecided and undiscerning—but whom we find commanding wherever the
             t    u    v    w    x    y


the latter returned to russia. in a new country, amid new conditions,

civilization, and culture. postulating some generalization as the goal

“well, good-by, your excellency, keep well!” said rostopchín,

i remember. even now i don’t know whether there really was a negro, or

and shot him in the fleshy part of the back. that wound (which tíkhon
conception of the ancients as to the direct participation of the deity
at once.
ask on my knees for your hand and your love!”
“no, you can’t understand what i learned from that illiterate man—that

button of his waistcoat.
condemn dreamers; now that of a satirist, and laugh ironically at his
beside the old prince.
coming toward him with a smile. but rostóv had noticed his first
officer passing by addressed him:


into her box for the rest of the performance, and natásha moved over to
to excuse me... god is my witness, i didn’t know—” he repeated,
chapter xx
nothing about firing it.”
“mind, i’ll smash your face in! don’t make jokes!” cried
that he had no opinion at all on the matter. another who wished to
positions and maintaining a hellish fire under which the french army was

prince bagratión and túshin looked with equal intentness at
sense in it for either the french or the russians. its immediate result
watched him. she smiled, hid her face in her handkerchief, and remained
of the orderlies and servants.
your battalions. i will keep out of fire if you with your habitual
and the consequent impossibility of a speedy emancipation.
in space. every human action is inevitably conditioned by what surrounds

prejudices, and equality of citizenship, and all these ideas napoleon
“but it’s all the same now,” pierre could not help saying.
events have no common sense and are all contradictory, as in the case of
during the battle, and feeling reassured he dozed off.... the dark


everyone must have personal hopes, princess mary in the profoundest
soul and his face.
