

sense of joy or relief, he gazed at what was taking place. the fifth man
drooping head and breathing heavily, pacing silently up and down. when
she could not have read the letter as she did not even know it had

balashëv respectfully ventured to disagree with the french emperor.
she said, indicating an old man with a profusion of silver-gray curly
the countess was accustomed to this tone as a precursor of news of
but prince andrew interrupted her by answering her intended question,
the silence lasted some time. prince bagratión, apparently not wishing
“very good?” said natásha reproachfully, noticing her brother’s
dangerous business, and if you think about it—a stupid business. well,
“a promise is own brother to performance! i said friday and here it is,
nights,” replied the doctor, and he sat down morosely beside his wife,
for him, she would have to abandon the hope of ever getting matters
the peasants went up and took him by his shoulders and legs, but he
intensified her misery.
seemed to him that it was getting lighter. to the left he saw a sloping
emperor francis would have been fulfilled long ago. i should long
rostóv felt uncomfortable and cast down his eyes.
around them cannon balls were flying, of which he was aware not so
matter-of-fact man which showed him what he ought to do.
her, to restrain themselves for this once precious being formerly as
desperate attack just to punish him—rostóv. then he imagined how,
“i don’t understand what is meant by ‘a skillful commander,’” replied
kuzmínichna tried to get as many of the wounded as possible into their
after these words, the mason, as if tired by his long discourse, again

leave him alone and for the first time in her life ventured to disobey

could i, and it cannot be seen if one looks on our life here as the end
occurred to him, though the question he was about to ask was the chief
had to be ordered to keep the “will” in.
drawing room. the guests began to disperse, some without taking leave
“oh, don’t talk to me of my regiment,” replied pierre, kissing his
a fine place! why are you not eating anything, gentlemen?” nesvítski
began.
army were like the plan of a market gardener who, when driving out of
seemed to be seeking something, and soldiers dragging doors, benches,
health, led the way to his mother, and having sat there for five minutes
“that was a daniel cooper!” exclaimed márya dmítrievna, tucking up
corps i have had occasion to observe during different stages of the last
alexander with all their antecedents.
“i’m not like that myself, but i understand. so you’re not angry with
first child who was delicate, when they had to change the wet nurse

service at the palace church in honor of the emperor’s birthday, prince
without looking at rostóv, as was his way at moments of deep feeling.
in some respects a brilliant match for the dowerless, orphan girl. from
began a conversation with him about feelings in general and about her
he told her she was still the same crybaby as ever. princess mary had
“surrounded! cut off? we’re lost!” shouted the fugitives.
“but i have nothing here,” replied pierre, supposing that he was
“now you don’t know that at all!” said nicholas. “but i must
with that softened, grateful, last look she had given him through her
work, give vent to her anger, and so on, merely because she had a
this assumption is all the more natural and inevitable because, watching
capture of transport trains on the smolénsk road, and by the battle of
censured, should not be held to blame.
beloved. and on its pages i saw a beautiful representation of a maiden



gave him the opportunity: sónya’s reading, any remark of the count’s, or
natásha glanced at her ironically without knowing why.
who got across the river fled farther. their supreme chief donned a
“oh! i thought you were in your room,” she said, for some reason
theater, where he had been with his family and denísov. he was at once
the imaginations of a dozen people. it could not exist because it was
same firm pressure of the hand and the same quick, repeated bows. as
chapter xxi
“there’ll hardly be another such chance to fall on a transport as today.
another.
“o lord, o lord! how starry it is! tremendous! that means a hard
constant composure and complacency and lack of all interests or desires,
when prince andrew went to him and, trying to rouse him, began to
“it did me so much good to tell all about it today. it was hard and
and, as if to make the russian general still more conscious of his
severe gaze straight on pierre’s face.
was, this was not even unpleasant to him. nothing mattered to him.
pathetic expression of sorrow, prayer, and hope in it. as had occurred
“you must excuse me, dear vicomte,” said prince vasíli to the
their neighbor.) “i knew you wouldn’t be able to resist it and
looking at her and waiting. nicholas saw that denísov was refusing
“indeed? yes, yes!” said borís, with a smile. “and we too have
pierre went with rapid steps to the door and suddenly came face to
the good of that? war is my profession, but his business is to reign
going: and besides—i am not joan of arc or an amazon.”
napoleon) only for the purpose of securing an armed peace, the
tomorrow!”
seized all the private carts in moscow and on one hundred and thirty-six
with painful dejection he awaited the end of this action, in which he
punishments were to be admonitory and not corporal, and hospitals,
moment and because many of the adjutants did not go to the actual place
“where you are, there is vice and evil!” said pierre to his wife.


for the life of man is expressed by muscular movements and muscular
“well, if you hadn’t told me you were russian, i should have wagered
machine, an impulse once given leads to the final result; and just as
the shed with super human force, throwing up a mass of earth. the ground
very attentive to kurágin.

the adoration then common in moscow for the emperor, who was spoken of
rubles, i remember. when i was in kiev, crazy cyril says to me (he’s
government offices removed; now distributed quite useless weapons to
it completely, so that alpátych could not pass out and had to wait.
     * “when an officer is making his round, sentinels don’t ask

one.... how not the right one?... o lord! and there’s another has been
“you won’t bear me a grudge, prokhór ignátych?” said the
of the man she loved. nicholas also noticed that look and, as if
might have been funny, but it lacked just that something which is the
“as you please.”
“very well, very well!” muttered the officer, threateningly, and
on sundays.
“what can he say? tra-di-ri-di-ra and so on... merely to gain time.
brightened into a happy, grateful, childlike smile.
their former disharmony and her own jealousy recurred to her mind.
advancing by forced marches toward znaim, which lay sixty-six miles
    chapter v
dinner. two officers of his own division joined him. the conversation
place in his soul. of late he had received so many new and very serious

pierre’s face, flushed and rapturous, but yet shy before his superior
have now become quite calm, quite calm.”
before the heights on which the russian batteries stood guarding the
“ah, a weapon?” said the officer and turned to the barefooted soldier

contented and happy with him. i only wish you were all as happy as i
angrily pulling down his tight scarf.
went away. natásha with a gay, coquettish smile talked to him, and
word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or
and the officers collected round to greet the new arrival, rostóv
said at tilsit.”
“shall we have time to change clothes?”


days and nights with a wallachian woman—prince andrew asked kutúzov
well.”
physical privation and strain he had suffered as prisoner until after
that had been so humiliating in her morning’s visit.
darkness, and though pierre could not see his face he felt that the man
looking pretty and conscious of it, were standing by the clavichord,
that this is admirable, this is glory—it resembles caesar and alexander
but even if we assume that fifty years ago alexander i was mistaken in
some particular incident. so now the courtiers’ pleasure was based as
to be grew stronger, and he meekly followed anna mikháylovna who was
to be opened. everywhere he saw the stewards’ accounts, according to
death.”



fixed on.
regiment was stationed at tver he had taken him from tver in the

sight of these blue french dragoons pursuing our uhlans. nearer and
andrew in his boyhood, helped pierre out of his carriage, said that the
hard, and (in her own way) proud princess.

had been hit—a large crowd had gathered near the second battalion.
sometimes keeping well back in them and sometimes coming to the very
feeling amazed themselves at what they had done.
and information, and like dokhtúrov he never made plans of battle but
reserved for them. a bald general with a st. george’s cross on his neck
prince andrew. “but where is it?” he again wondered, gazing at
from the time that pierre began life as a family man on a footing

birches that formed the forest, it was ten times as thick and twice as
with petersburg, and so on. but the destruction of the french, which he

days without eating. we’ve nothing, we’ve been ruined.”

in the hall the porch door opened, and someone asked, “at home?” and


eating! i think that punishment by depriving children of sweets only
wished it so.
“long-coat” which settled him. bennigsen suddenly reddened and paced
otrádnoe, but had never been to see them.
head while you were asleep. forgive me, daddy,’ he says, ‘for christ’s

suddenly something happened: the young officer gave a gasp and bending
against one another, you two, and i’ll look on!”

him die feeling that he is rendering unhappy those who...”
chapter xx
“count ilyá rostóv’s son?” asked dolgorúkov.

tell her everything!” said she to pierre. “one hasn’t the heart to scold

different lodgings. as soon as the men of the various regiments began
freedom i could understand it and should be the first to enter the army;
“what is that?” asked the countess as if she did not know what the
in an hour, all the costumes were crumpled and disordered. the corked
once more the conversations concentrated, the ladies’ at the one end
to talk to tíkhon who did not understand him. i remember how he began
sónya and began sorting patterns with her.
son’s arrival: he gave orders to admit him to his apartments while
official whom dólokhov made use of in his gambling transactions, and

not submit to speránski’s opinions entirely. everything was right

round the table, the clatter of plates, knives, and glasses mingled with

head steward’s calculation, about two million rubles.
soldiers used to tell of an evening (they were always the same), but

from the doctor to pierre. to him, in a particularly respectful and
one of the ápsheron regiment went forward past the emperor.
in me. i have been told that her brother anatole was in love with her
there. pierre had the air of a man preoccupied with considerations which
though they were ordered not to do so, as it was a noxious plant. that
servants’ quarters.
advisers!” said he. “if we had listened to them all we should not have
“has prince vasíli aged much?” asked the countess. “i have not

he was silent.
vílna. in that wealthy town, which had not been injured, he found old
music. the host followed with márya antónovna narýshkina; then

monastery), prince andrew, who was rather late, found the friendly
french families. he is one of the genuine émigrés, the good ones. and
platón with one of his round smiles, obviously pleased with his work.
“oh, i don’t know, it is all so strange,” replied sónya, clutching at

side, so close to our own forces that napoleon with the naked eye could
finger, saying, “june,” and continued, kissing, “july, august,”
their sufferings. deprived of power and authority, his crimes and his
was a deafening report, and all were enveloped in a cloud of smoke. the
struggled against it. latterly she had become convinced that she loved
wood, met túchkov there barring his way, and could not and did not turn
malignantly at márya dmítrievna.

denísov’s voice from the next room.
with regard to administrative matters, moscow was granted a
such orders were given by the officers on the spot nearest to the
“we won’t speak of it, my dear—i’ll tell him everything; but one thing

inevitability itself, that is, a mere form without content.
for having failed to do so.

cautious movements of those who crowded round the invalid chair that

called, but in the fact that he alone understood the significance of
“sell us that horse!” denísov called out to the cossacks.
a hero of some sort, and reproached one another and especially kutúzov

arm.
is nice. he is very nice, and i love him like a son. but what then?...
hostile to him since she had felt herself under obligations to him after
granted that were they competent they might be made use of,” continued
inquired.
something terrible.

“moscow has nothing else to do but gossip,” borís went on.
was saying. “have you seen lázarev?”
berg. “this is what comes of knowing how to conduct oneself.”
“take this and deliver it,” said he to his adjutant, handing him the


words. if you are going to fight a duel, and you make a will and write
opinion sure to carry him off. but on the seventh day he ate with
account yield their position. mary hendríkhovna obliged them with the
words clearly did not correspond to his thoughts):
“she has written to you. how she torments herself, poor thing! she’s
that was as yet burning only at one end, just below the roof, and around
of which was occupied by prince andrew. the wounded man was much better
from them; even the soldiers, usually pitiless enough, instead of taking
conversation, and though anna pávlovna felt sure he would say something
grandee of catherine’s time who now lay dying in moscow. the young man
on the old general. he carefully and hastily felt himself all over,
her with perfect sincerity, and with the naïve and firm conviction

were pushing back the crowd, rostóv kept his eyes on every movement
“stretchers!” shouted someone behind him.
was not a frenchman, the captain, evidently not understanding how anyone

“from dürrenstein to krems.”
something in her reticule. “besides, the trousseau is ready, so there
knew that it sprang from pierre’s whole soul), but it was his animated

consciousness.
but the shouting which accompanied him everywhere disturbed him and
he never knew or remembered. “this must be one of her companions,” he

much interest him because at that moment he felt with delight that he
wretched mood. at nine in the morning, he heard firing in front and
that the french retreat from moscow was a series of victories for
in wine, and some in governmental affairs. “nothing is trivial, and
contrary were generally morally weaker than any of the millions they
same instant he was dazzled by a great flash of flame, and immediately a

being paid to her, read the last words:
highest aristocracy, to an ambassador’s ball he had attended, and to
journey he found himself in the open world and saw hundreds of new
“wait, i have not finished...” he said to prince andrew, seizing
particularly cold, stern, and above all unpleasantly logical.
along the road and field leading to the otrádnoe covert.
his orders. he desires to end your misfortunes and restore you to your
   have we not bagratión?

that had not entered her mind for years—thoughts of a life free from
“i bet a hundred on stevens!” shouted one.

expressed by details of the morbid character of iván the terrible and by
prince andrew kept looking with an amused smile from pierre to the

rostóv, without returning home, took a horse and rode there. there was
he divided the brothers he knew into four categories. in the first he
“to be sure, we all have to die. i’m not against the commune,” said
chapter ix
his large eyes into balashëv’s face and immediately looked past him.
position.
execution. every order executed is always one of an immense number
they then crossed the hollow to semënovsk, where the soldiers were
face at all suited to a battlefield, but a most ordinary, homelike face.
awoke in natásha’s soul.

refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity
forever, forever!” she pleaded.
involuntarily yielded to them. she went through the accounts with
affairs, took advantage of the armistice to get leave to visit denísov
inflicted on the duke of oldenburg, the nonobservance of the continental
prisoner enhanced his own importance as a russian hero. the italian
words: “gallop off to kórchevo and carry out instructions!”
guilty of anything, he added, taking pierre’s hand in a friendly manner,
pierre saw that the count was much upset and tried to change the
suddenly changed to one of horror. the french were supposed to be a
the army to the other.
“no, it cannot be! how happy i am! but it can’t be.... how happy i am!
in history we find a very similar progress of conviction concerning
he is bóry’s godfather—and allow him something for his maintenance,
to rest after their hard marches.
himself with society gossip, dancing, intellectual games, and bouts
particularly calm and absent-minded way, which inspired the respect of
to the big table. not only was pierre’s attempt to speak unsuccessful,
“louis xvi was executed because they said he was dishonorable and a
his brisk little horse.

well and have the greatest respect for them.”
guests were all conversing with one another. “the razumóvskis... it
defile through narrow village streets when we are marching against the
for reinforcements and all said that the russians were holding their
painful to him at this moment of sorrow; besides, what can i say to him
“hurrah!” pursued them so far beyond the battery that it was difficult
a war had there been no english intrigues and no duke of oldenburg, and

murat’s face beamed with stupid satisfaction as he listened to “monsieur
smoke spasmodically and screwing up his eyes. this was an old bachelor,
will not reach your regiment before peace is concluded, or you will
tíkhon did not like riding, and always went on foot, never lagging
“nonsense!” he cried, and the veins on his forehead and neck stood
what pierre did not know was that the place where they presented him

bourienne aroused her. she raised her eyes, and two steps away saw
the bridge and its celebrated bridgehead and prince auersperg? we heard
his arm and really catching the tune.
but they were exceptions.
urged on his already weary horse to get quickly past these crowds, but
in an historical sense involuntary and is related to the whole course of
dancing began in which nicholas still further captivated the provincial
provisions, rostóv found a family consisting of an old pole and his
another like a flock of sheep, squeezed into the exit, pierre pushed
“father,” she said, “do not turn away from me, let us weep
must have an explanation...”
never authorized to make that demand, and as soon as i was informed of
suddenly he sniffed and put his face closer to the window.

evidently taking a bad turn. every day, letters of inquiry and notices
himself in the crowd) that they could not let the princess go, that
she woke late. that sincerity which often comes with waking showed her
her companions’ not having the least conception that it could be
place, as he had felt under the parental roof. but here was none of
historians themselves tell us that from smolénsk onwards he wished
limits of privation a man can endure; but thanks to his physical


of borodinó was napoleon’s senseless flight from moscow, his retreat
alcohol, and sounds of voices and shouting in the distance.
plastered only inside. it had bare deal floors and was furnished with

and the rewards sent to the army are innumerable. though he is a
kutúzov’s suite like a flock of little birds.
“if we don’t take it tomowwow, he’ll snatch it fwom under our noses,” he
sleepy. the punch was finished and there was still nothing to do. he
something striking and took part in a conversation only when that was
and, having spent the day with him, returned to barclay and condemned,
went on rapidly. “general barclay de tolly risked his life everywhere at
ascended the carpeted stairs.
regard to this project of marriage for me, i will tell you, dear sweet
thought again now. “now he will never tell anyone what he had in his
speaking to an austrian general. prince andrew, who was a little behind

by the arm and put him in the corner. having put him in the corner


progression; and that crossing of the berëzina about which so much has
though i don’t like letting you go, it is the best way. so go, with

prince andrew’s mind.
importance and that no time must be lost. he did not consider or ask

understood it all, and at the same time followed a train of personal
substituting a z for the s and adding de and the article le, still
he had stayed in the shed where he was first put.
what awaited her. she did not even cry when, on taking leave, he kissed


increases my astonishment. i am sending this by adjutant-general prince

flower; natásha, half grown up and half child, was now childishly
of the soldiers remain with the standards of their regiments, the others
junction—though that was the chief aim of all at headquarters—because,
andrew, though he saw him now for the first time. there was about
happiness. the old princess sighed sadly as she offered some wine to the
sky—the lofty sky, not clear yet still immeasurably lofty, with gray

his hat and gloves; another brought him a pocket handkerchief. napoleon,
vítebsk....”
among the russian people. but no one at the time foresaw (what now seems
caressing word such as he had never used to her before. “why didn’t you
as anatole had not turned up did not stay for dinner but drove home.

the priest with a goose feather anointed the boy’s little red and
“highly satisfied, your excellency!”
made elegantly witty. in society he always awaited an opportunity to say
historians’ language.
morand’s and gérard’s divisions (for whose movements no directions are



the tsar looked intently and observantly into kutúzov’s eye
and well-rounded in these deft movements, in the man’s well-ordered
the causes that produce it. but modern history has not done this. having

looking with tender affection and pity at mademoiselle bourienne’s


know!”
one of the doctors came out of the tent in a bloodstained apron,




promised in her heart to do better and to accomplish the impossible—in
right to left—maintained their extended position from the village of
the evening, heaven knows what might not have happened. but tomorrow we
“the berlin cabinet cannot express a feeling of alliance,” began
it.

for her own sake.
turned and saw julie sitting beside her mother with a happy look on her
narrow and burdensome and useless to anyone as his life now seemed to

which, as commands, were related to events, historians have assumed

“what is it?” asked the person in the other room.
heard bickering with one another.
his vanguard, driving off the cossacks, crossed the russian frontier,
that is, an event took place opposed to human reason and to human
tale, nor did he like zdrzhinski himself who, with his mustaches

    * old style.
still there?”
even to natásha herself it was pleasant to see that so many sacrifices
a cheerful one, dunyásha, who went with her in the carriage, more than

some of the nearest relatives had not yet left. they were sitting in
there must be some linen left over.”

“she is not very well,” answered mademoiselle bourienne with
had said. on hearing that he was going to petersburg natásha was
he did not see him and had no opportunity of seeing him, he often spoke
known that it was costing him a thousand rubles, and that he would not
so on evstáfey’s representation pierre had to put off his departure till
the retreat but of losing in that retreat all i held dear—not to mention
clear and simple; but now, alone by herself, it was incomprehensible.

soon he really shut his eyes and fell asleep. he did not sleep long and
they looked at her careworn, despairing face, felt sure she would fall
down by them.
of battle. there were still the same suffering, exhausted, and sometimes
to his inn. the paper handed to him by the governor said this:
natásha—“it’s my fault. but it all hurts terribly. oh, why
“and i was looking for you,” said natásha running out to him. “i

was diverted by the desperate shrieks of the woman in the vehicle. an
after the french victory at borodinó there was no general engagement nor
feeling of sickening agitation.
book nine: 1812
natásha and princess mary looked at one another in silence, and the



or making her feel uncomfortable or displeased.

their relation is always one of inverse proportion.
some inspection business,” remarked the visitor.

anything that went on that evening. they danced the écossaise and the
that’s not what is needed now.
at the sight of the tortured frenchman and the crowd surrounding the
blushing.

differently. people accustomed to misunderstand or to forget these
in their conflicts with one another is expressed in wars, and that as a

propose.
in spite of prince andrew’s disagreeable, ironical tone, in spite of

entrusted. the more he realized the absence of all personal motive in
is self-assured just because he knows nothing and does not want to know
although prince vasíli listened reluctantly and not very politely
or weeping over its downfall. the tales and descriptions of that time
opened it and took a pinch. “back!” cried simon to a borzoi that

and until you have ceased to love the woman of your choice and have seen

pierre rode up to them. without being aware of it he had come to the
soldiers lifted the canteen lids to their lips with reverential faces,
but not yet sure what stirred him or what he would say. scarcely had he
his boots on again. some built little houses of the tufts in the plowed

“why aren’t you serving in the army?”
near neskúchny, endless rows of troops and carts stretched away into
set fire to the schön grabern village, delayed the french advance. the

bagratión called to him, and túshin, raising three fingers to his cap
a step, and with his whole weight, as if lying down to rest, fell on

beaming smile to his head.
added, looking smilingly at the little girl who clung to her father.
when the flame of the sulphur splinters kindled by the tinder burned
no one knows when? armfeldt says our army is cut in half, and paulucci
naples, who knows what’s what, cried ‘bravo!’ ha, ha! so you are one of
now considered everything possible.

exposed, and without fuel or forage, so something must be done, and, as
“but you can’t. mamma said you mustn’t,” said nicholas to
knew might interest the old lady and that she could understand. he
and the prostrate adjutant, near a wormwood plant between the field and
palace, when he had suddenly felt that wealth, power, and life—all that

of his former bachelor acquaintances many were no longer in petersburg.

denísov smiled, took out of his sabretache a handkerchief that diffused


her handsome eldest daughter were in the drawing room with the visitors

cometh!’”
long-drawn sigh she seemed to be prepared for a lengthy talk.
and the staff captain rose and turned away from rostóv.
in the damp chill air and crowded closeness of the swaying carriage, she
he looked straight at prince andrew and suddenly unwrinkled his
really good society” consisted of the fascinating hélène, forsaken

“my father, to whom i have told my plans, has made it an express
“well, friends, i have now thought the whole matter over and this is
of the carriage.

was out of the room.
who remained behind decided for themselves what they must do.
happiness did not appear impossible to her. it was at those moments that
book.
several overturned carts, and frightened and laughing faces among the


summer.
collective will of the people transferred to one person. under what
him, peremptorily requested him to remain there, to move on with the
“we have been told,” princess mary interrupted her, “that you lost two
his breast and a serene expression on his flat face. he spoke in that
scabbard and flourishing it.
evenings for years, she regretted julie’s presence and having no one
balashëv told him why he considered napoleon to be the originator of the

man.
“will they burn the bridge or not? who’ll get there first? will they
also the abbé morio. do you know that profound thinker? he has been
prince andrew reached the general headquarters of the army at the end of
and had rooms for the house serfs and apartments for visitors. whole
them from the other end of the corridor, strauch, an austrian general
branches of trees heavy with hoarfrost.
unconsciously, she opened and closed her hand in time to the music,
possible. kutúzov himself with all his transport took the road to
“all the points of our position are in the enemy’s hands and we cannot
“you think so?... ah, i also wanted to ask you where our position is

rose in alarm on seeing it.
their former friendly relations.
“yes, father, i have come to you and brought my wife who is
mud and clanking the ring of his leash, walked along just behind
him.
dólokhov reined in his horse and advanced at a walk.
radiant look which caused the plainness of her face to be forgotten.
amazed at his own words.

stern face, but seeing, that natásha’s head was covered, she smiled
kept coming into her eyes. anna mikháylovna, with the letter, came on
ignominious death awaits those who make any attempt on your persons or

her betrothed, found the same comfort in that love, and was still as
now aiming, now counting the charges, now giving orders about replacing
have done she felt bound to say and do. she went into prince andrew’s
when natásha opened prince andrew’s door with a familiar movement and

are the absence of freedom, that is, discipline, idleness, ignorance,

“what business is it of yours?” cried the count.
especially on returning to the old conditions of life amid which he had
himself on a sofa with his face to the wall. pierre hid his face, from

“you can’t, miss, we have tried to,” said the butler’s assistant.
modern history replying to these questions says: you want to know what

square with its snow undisturbed by vehicles, the sleigh drivers and

outer man? there was a time when i could have done it. i could have run
caught.
bits he turned and went out.
expression—the same man who had rushed out of the wattle shed. at that

first because pierre appeared to his hussar eyes as a rich civilian, the
neither pierre nor any of the others spoke of what they had seen in

an army enters bohemia. napoleon i issues a decree and an army enters

could not move it. he smashed a pane.
sónya, shaking off some down which clung to her and tucking away the


irresistible human need for sleep. he really was asleep. weyrother, with
awful...” and he burst into tears.

her powers since morning had been concentrated on ensuring that they
“that’s what comes of a modern education,” exclaimed the visitor.
moment, laid in it an order on a red ribbon. napoleon, without looking,
he was somewhat flushed with the wine and the drive. his eyes were
against napoleon.
“please, vasíli dmítrich,” natásha was saying, “do come!”
a whole sequence of new thoughts, hopeless but mournfully pleasant, rose
the absorption of the french by moscow, radiating starwise as it did,
in killed, wounded, sick, and stragglers; though a number of sick and
but although alpátych, frightened at his own temerity in avoiding the
confirm this supposition—then she told herself that only she, with her
representative of authority as well as, and even better than, at other
after rain, and the air was unusually pure. the smoke did not hang low
wearing scarves and all their decorations, not only the elegant, pomaded
black-eyed three-year-old natásha, her father’s pet, having learned from
and began dancing round the room with it.
“handsome, isn’t she?” he whispered to natásha.
“what force!” remarked one. “knocked the roof and ceiling all to
necessary,” said the younger of the two speakers, evidently in the



packed the night before now lay about the yard, and still they went on
that the advantage was now on our side. there was a substantial change
something with an expression of mingled joy and sorrow.
which they apparently do not recognize.
natásha saw there was nothing to be afraid of and so she braved even

andrew was galloping along in a post chaise enjoying the feelings of a
before and was less frequently at home.
neithah soldiers no’ peasants, and we’ll get only depwavity fwom them.
within him, as happens at critical moments of life. whether it was from


advice of moscow doctors would be good for her.
princess mary turned to sónya and, trying to stifle the hostile
lower part of it something quivered.
be) who had crushed him.
under present circumstances a formal betrothal was, of course, not to be
at one another, and that look saved pierre. apart from conditions of war
develop existed within him. his meeting with pierre formed an epoch in
certain, nothing at all except the unimportance of everything i
me,” thought natásha—“is it possible that i am now to be the
occupied by them.
“one moment, one moment!” replied the adjutant, and riding up to a stout

he had too long been thinking of so painfully to the exclusion of all
she took his arm and with a happy face went with him into the adjoining

that the french were not all captured or destroyed when our three armies
they don’t see it!” came identical shouts from the ranks all along the


he did not know, but some he recognized. the young officer still sat in
prince andrew’s last stay at boguchárovo, when he introduced hospitals

think so,” and so on.
another. “the day before yesterday it was ‘napoléon, france,
he remembered his honeymoon and blushed at the recollection.
“he is minister of war, a man trusted by the emperor, and i need not
father, pensively watching the lights of the street lamps flickering on
his mother’s old lady companion belóva, his wife, their three children
he is here!” thought rostóv, who had unconsciously returned to the

    chapter xxxii

then, wostóv, now then!”
“the children will live just the same. with such masters one can live.”
harmful, for it is impossible to say for what it was useful or harmful.
a man he is! now don’t think badly of me or of him. i don’t think
“don’t like bowwowing from my own fellows, i don’t,” growled
aim was to unite them, though uniting the armies was no advantage if we

    chapter xi
which not one battle had been won, and in which not a flag, or cannon,
why they all looked so at him, and flattered by this general admiration
desire to serve, not sparing their lives, and it is not any kind of
coming out upon a broad trodden track across a meadow, near a river.
“it can’t be helped! it happens to everyone!” said the son, with
of austria, and having, as his historian tells us, tenderly embraced the
and suddenly, at the sound of the service, she felt horrified at her own
“of course! it’s marvelous. so bold, so easy!”
bridge, cross it, and now with their whole army are on this side of the
coffin, a pall was spread over it, the floor was strewn with sprays of
russians from krems to znaim.

brains enough. now, hunting is another matter—that’s it, come on!
and simple law—the law of love and self-sacrifice taught us by him who
take the landlord’s grain,” said a voice at the back of the crowd.
fidelity to a man who on his part, by entering the married state without

a white dressing gown, his wife at the tea table, his wife’s carriage,

but natásha looked at her as if not understanding what was said to her

so the countess had been sent for. pierre saw the distracted count, and
after her father’s funeral princess mary shut herself up in her room and

the so-called duke of elchingen (ney) ventured to remark that a movement

what he had just been praying for with confidence that god would hear

condition of his consent that the wedding is not to take place for a

things that he has been expelled by the police.”
“with her mother, isn’t it?”
glínka, the editor of the russian messenger, who was recognized (cries
different from themselves and from everyone else, expected great things

question has no meaning for a russian.” (he lurched his heavy body
did it purposely when she was there) the old prince kissed mademoiselle

princess mary still more. after five minutes of irksome, constrained
“i am not in the cavalry, colonel, but i am a russian general and if
chapter xix
might be killed like the three sons of one of her acquaintances, struck
who kissed his hand.
“how can you know? no, mamma, don’t speak to him! what nonsense!”
did his utmost to gain his new master’s favor.
leaning his elbow on his knee and covering his face with his hand. after
the sensation of this drawing out and the construction of this edifice
embarrassed, “is the emperor...?”

napoleon and about the uniforms they wore, and listened attentively to
someone’s eye.
today, and it will be tomorrow, and always; and there was yesterday, and
the center of the russian army, and that that center was already
chapter xii
dangles.... see, she’s got a little hunting horn!”
grateful look, but was still expectant and looking for someone. the old
brown morose face with frowning brows was clearly visible by the glow of
“she is well, but sad. but do you know who rescued her? it is quite a
inhabitants, but he also thought he controlled their mental attitude by
on his knees for her hand and her love—uttered at a moment when she was
the largest direct share in the event take on themselves the least
room.

foremost began to turn, while those behind began to halt. with the same
habit of walking, had been swept: the marks of the broom were still

draped over one shoulder, came into the space left vacant for her, and
on her face and showing no concern for her mistress.



met. involuntarily he noticed a georgian or armenian family
humanity.
see the expression of a higher spiritual life (that was why he did not
prisoners had been captured.




lubyánka street.
not at once raise, and he spent most of his time in the girls’ room.
newly erected buildings were standing empty and that the serfs continued
there be in a matter in which, as in all practical matters, nothing


for he could not help being what he was—that (though he tried to
“borodinó,” the other corrected him.
not only did prince andrew know he would die, but he felt that he was
the country life to which she was accustomed, youth prevailed. natásha’s
daren’t say so. it will be as i said at the beginning of the campaign,
impression. whether dolgorúkov and weyrother, or kutúzov, langeron,
of the night. the gloom that enveloped the army was filled with their

that pleasure because he was already under the command of the polish
several men joined the first two.
vasílchikov and plátov had already seen the count and explained to him

conditions of life to which its people were accustomed to submit would
same place on the poklónny hill awaiting the deputation. his speech to
experienced for the last fortnight, and the joy that had lit up her

all turned their attention to the glow.
napoleon into the depths of the country was not the result of any plan,
the understanding of the force which produces events, and furnish no
brushed up into a huge shock. he stood in full view of the audience,

more cheerful in his presence, and were evidently anxious to display
“there! i said if only we waited—and so it was!” was being joyfully said


concealed the fact under a show of irritation and contempt, he was
feels, anyone who comes in sight of the enemy, and that feeling gives
the second princess had just come from the sickroom with her eyes red

son, ilyá? only fancy, i didn’t know you at first. do you remember
near him pricked their ears at these shouts. over there, where the
character set encoding: utf-8
and irritation, though controlledly calm as a man is at the approach of
her sister dropped the portfolio. anna mikháylovna, stooping, quickly
so kann man gewiss nicht den verlust der privat-personen in achtung
my dear, whether the will and letter were written, and whether they have
whom the boy did not remember appeared to him a divinity who could not
showed how he presented himself, with his hand to his cap, and really
well educated and clever. this is all that his foreign education has
had lived till then, and sorry and almost ashamed as she felt to leave


remarks he rose. “if you’ll allow me to leave my natásha in your
napoleon
“the position?” repeated the doctor. “well, that’s not my line. drive
being beaten and finally feeling that his hands were bound and that a
the study of the movement of the nations and of humanity and not the
bolkhovítinov gave a detailed account from the beginning of all he had
human skull with its cavities and teeth. after reading the first words
escape that force, to address entreaties or exhortations to those who
youth, with a stony look on his face, and rigid and uplifted arm, stood
affairs, which they all agreed in approving, prince andrew began to
brave officer,” thought bagratión. prince andrew, without replying,
preoccupied that only in bed was he able to be by himself. he had to
that remained uninjured out of the four, they began moving down the hill
that soldier’s breast for the soldier to be forever happy, rewarded,

paternal intentions of his majesty the emperor and king and to
the partisan warfare flamed up most fiercely in the latter days of
pierre was looking into princess mary’s eyes.
not moscow was taken as smolénsk had been, was suddenly checked in his
prince nicholas had always ridiculed medicine, but latterly on
eyes attracted him irresistibly.
distinguished him from everyone else in that drawing room.
“into the stove... into the fire with it! i tell you once for all, my

“the snow is deep. i am having the avenue swept, your honor.”
kitten which promises to become a beautiful little cat. she evidently
historic persons may perhaps explain much in the domain of jurisprudence
defection, ran at a trot, panting to catch up with his company. a cannon
having written this and given the paper to alpátych, he told him how
“yes, and i have some money and a letter to give you,” he added.
quoique étranger, russe de cœur et d’âme, * as he said of himself.
tíkhon knew his master’s habit of sometimes thinking aloud, and
again.
arm and stepping back from the door.
terrible loss to dólokhov. here, in the regiment, all was clear and
that if anyone should come from you they were to have the books.”


up, first blue and then red, shcherbínin lit the tallow candle, from
in the drawing room, talking to the little princess and mademoiselle
a banister post stood a tallow candle which guttered in the draft. on
he was apt to succumb. he felt that everything was now at an end, all

empress’ field, not understanding the significance of the firing, nor
peter the valet, who was now wide awake, had roused the doctor.
that had taken place in pierre. they considered that he had become much
power only because they fulfill the will of the people which has been
her nephew’s education. she was sad. now, after a month passed in quiet
the history of the life of the peoples.
three hours. eh?”
borne by the waves from one shore to another as before. they now seemed

door opened quickly and the stern figure of the old man in the white
latterly that private life had become very trying for princess mary.
what had been said to him and following these verbal fireworks with
    chapter ix
only by the elite.
he pities the boy.’ i’ll show them tomorrow whether i’m a boy. will it
forces of western europe crossed the russian frontier and war began,
acquaintance. having ridden up to nicholas, ilágin raised his beaver
turned to his wife.
carts would not be forthcoming.

same applies to historical events. why war and revolution occur we do
where a wolf might come out. having straightened his coat and fastened

but he immediately recalled his promise to prince andrew not to go
form a clear conception of the man. pfuel was one of those hopelessly
    chapter vi

bourienne at once began crying again and kissed that hand, speaking of

four days before, sentinels of the preobrazhénsk regiment had stood in
loved natásha and when dying had left her to his friend. but the father
“go on! what the devil... go on! thirty thousand devils!...” the convoy
and ministers, and by the lives of napoleon, rousseau, diderot,



position by each army, even what information was obtained could not be
family. military, administrative, political, and masonic interests
at this big, stout, quiet man, wondering how such a clumsy, modest
glory of thy rule, sings in exultation, ‘hosanna, blessed is he that
“o lord god! thou who art in that heaven, save, forgive, and protect
us aides-de-camp and adjutants! but this is what we’ll do: i have
is the passion for destruction.
    book four: 1806
knapsack a scrap of blue french cloth, and wrapped it round his foot.
“no, no! i’ll do anything!” she said, suddenly checking her tears.
parents, and leave it to me. i will tell her when i can. i wish it to
and moved to the right; from behind it, dispersing the laggards, came
further strengthened in him by the high opinion his fellow prisoners
he imagined men such as he had himself been a fortnight ago, and he
napoleon had assented and had given orders that news should be brought
that god heard her prayer.

sir!”
she spoke she raised her eyes with a sigh, and her gesture conveyed a
“go!” the quivering voice repeated. and prince vasíli had to go
the high-shouldered figure of zherkóv, familiar to the pávlograds as
their name and my own i hold out a brotherly hand to you.”
flank now that it is nearly four o’clock and the battle is lost?
“princess, i must warn you,” she added, lowering her voice and

godfather,” she added, as if she attached no importance at all to the
this red-haired man was neither a sergeant nor a corporal, but being
with kutúzov’s cantata, laid one before pierre as one of the
impulse.
she was expecting prince andrew any moment and twice that day sent a

laughter led by natásha. both partners stood still, breathing heavily
“captain ramballe, of the 13th light regiment, chevalier of the legion
received and read the then famous rescript of the emperor alexander
“have you lost anyone, my dear fellow? you’re of the gentry yourself,
told him that he had been pardoned and would now go to the barracks for


regarded all these little adjutants on the staff of whom the newcomer
the first to catch his eye. he sent him.


refined french in which our grandfathers not only spoke but thought, and
century had been the aggrandizement of russia, that aim might have been
“what can i do with them?” thought natásha.
and, doing so, groaned involuntarily.
to have a tête-à-tête with natásha—mademoiselle bourienne
anyone looking at the disorganized rear of the russian army would have

long account of father amphilochus, who led so holy a life that his
casual tone of a man dealing with a subject quite familiar to him.
his influence with the commander in chief to induce him to take the
who made her a low bow when she met him in the corridor carrying hot
the posts left vacant by bagratión, who had been killed, and by
historic characters and perceive the cause of the effect they produce

she opened the door and the bright daylight in that previously darkened
out of it. they could not understand that i have not the necessary

“yes, yes,” she said, answering something quite different. “i too should
seeing prince andrew stopped, hesitating on the threshold. he went into
so according to history it has been found from the most ancient times,
pávlovna’s words and looks when she spoke to him about his house,
kutúzov to the emperor. “i can neither punish him if he does wrong nor
our youths, look at our ladies! the french are our gods: paris is our
her brother shook his head incredulously.

spent most of their time together. when one went out the other became
man’s free will, a scientific enunciation of those laws is impossible,
haste to satisfy all their expectations.
“your offer...” she began at last sedately. he remained silent,
sónya sighed and made no reply. the count, pétya, madame schoss, mávra

dew was imperceptible on the sandy dust churned up more than six inches


in front. there were about thirty officers, with pierre among them, and
they had hardly begun to play before the doctor’s disheveled head
fellow repeated one after the other, and they moved up the street
was rapidly demonstrating that not only all that had happened, but all
eternal, and infinite in all his attributes?...”
have seen how he said it! i know he did not mean to say it, but it came
pávlovna’s usual pink notes with an invitation to which was added:
