it worth thinking or speaking of it at such a moment? at a time of such
melyukóvka, it is still stranger that we drove heaven knows where and
alexander’s eyes. alexander listened attentively to what was said to
forces, did people begin to assure themselves that they had desired this
his mood safely to his destination. and even had he not been hindered by
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied

kutúzov’s whole army. to be able to crush it absolutely he awaited
pierre could not afterwards remember how he went, whether it was far, or

mary attributed to his being too weak to write or to his considering the
gave no answer, she left the room.
not keep up with them; cavalry and artillery horses broke down, and the
is dressed! lovely! and that stout one in spectacles is the universal

traditions of unlimited power, in time when they grow more irritable,
an adjutant came out and announced that everything was in readiness
face in the lace of her mother’s mantilla—not paying the least
“how like his father he is,” pierre interjected.
who entered the room and glanced uneasily around, evidently expecting
and especially since he had joined the active army and taken part in
their musical talent, to sing something. natásha, who was treated as
sill. “listen!” cried he, standing there and addressing those in the

entreaties. soon after anna pávlovna’s reception anna mikháylovna
timókhin crept along the bench to him.
and had now, as if purposely, sent his men to the very woods the
current of his thoughts, “that anatole is costing me forty thousand
“then what is this blood on the gun carriage?” inquired túshin.
are—at the heart of affairs and of the world—is the talk all of

were kindly attentive and sadly interrogative.
than i expected. evidently it had to be....”
natásha, sónya, madame schoss, and two maids got into nicholas’
“he has spoken? yes? he has spoken?” she repeated.
foot, flooding the dam, because it was full of the naked white bodies
master began answering him, and pierre began developing his views with
whether we speak of the migration of the peoples and the incursions
have done for us.”
by the insoluble question whether she loved anatole or prince andrew.
not as he had done before, but really well, and by being a perfectly
i need.” but when he came across a man of position his instinct
sign that they fully understood one another.
seemed to say, as with a scarcely perceptible smile he looked at
in front of him was misty darkness. rostóv could see nothing, peer as

splendidly.”

the position was the more awkward because the emperor, meditating upon
begin talking about him in the presence of that frenchwoman,” thought
that state of mind which makes everything seem possible, pleasant, and
“god grant only that prince kutúzov assumes real power and does not


german, you know. he”—he indicated pétya—“is serving under him.”
self-satisfaction in his face and bearing. though it was impossible to
of the war that had been announced in a manifesto, and about the

pistol, dagger, and peasant coat were ready. napoleon was to enter the
came in from his club, cheerful and contented. nicholas, hearing him
happy faces round the carts. the news that carts were to be had spread
concern for the safety of the arsenal at túla, and especially the
julie and borís looked on one another as the only souls who understood
service, and he at once understood his role, letting his hostess make


boldly, with saucy gaiety, confident that her prank would be taken in

“wait a bit, sónya, you’ll understand everything. you’ll see what
particular—was such that the debts inevitably increased every year.
themselves quite innocent, and since that day when he was overpowered

report, only now and then, silently or by a brief word, showing that
wall of the sick hive, instead of the former instant unanimous

by the ammunition wagon.
the little princess talked incessantly, her short, downy upper lip

his horse indolently and carelessly. rostóv recalled their quarrel of
but evidently the crisis was over and he was convalescent. prince andrew
the foe made him forget his own sorrow. he was entirely devoted to the
natásha raised her head and, kissing her friend on the lips, pressed

old man too came up and kissed the waxen little hands that lay quietly

not to come to the drawing room when he called to see her aunt—that it

not rise. rostóv also tried to rise but fell back, his sabretache
those richer and more powerful than himself and he had rare skill in

timidly, into the anteroom, then hiding behind one another they pushed
berg. “the army is burning with a spirit of heroism and the leaders, so
natásha won’t lack suitors. still, it has been going on so long, and
“yes, in these days it would be hard to live without faith...” remarked
daughter seemed to say: “there, you see? you plotted against me, you
price. the tone of the proclamation was not as jocose as in the former
“you cannot know me, general, i have never seen you...”
“oh, if anyone knew how little anything matters to me now,” she said.
replied by asking him to go, but to fix a definite date for his return.
supposed that the russian guards, abroad, was quite a definite address,
horsemen could be descried. the officers said that either napoleon or
    * to force the guard.
large dark ballroom. all was the same: there were the same old card
from the barn, flushed, sunburned, and perspiring, with a smell of
when they came in to tea, having taken off their outdoor things and
never have led me to suppose that that could serve as a pretext for
surroundings of human life. daniel himself felt this, and as usual stood

feared lest the confusion she felt might overwhelm her and betray her as
hearts of nicholas and natásha, arousing in them the same kind of
his answer. rostóv noticed by their faces that all those gentlemen had

“no, why be sorry? being here, you had to pay your respects. but if he
same time, a large proportion of human error comes from the arbitrary
truth of his statements.


son’s affair hushed up, but even he was ordered out of petersburg.”
had been killed at the beginning of the engagement and within an hour
it,” says history.

the sun had reached the other side of the house, and its slanting rays
when he had reported himself to the commander of the regiment and had
laughed loudly at it.
of affairs?” concluded his father. “but it troubles me. i don’t
father, and always at the thought of enemies and those who hated her she
“mary, you must despise me!” he would say. “i deserve it.”

several thousand rubles quitrent received from pierre’s peasants,
share defeat and disgrace with kutúzov’s whole army.”
horses, and not a soul was to be seen there. in the great drawing
brought for the emperor to be carried before him and entered the first
“the duke of oldenburg bears his misfortunes with admirable
particularly calm and absent-minded way, which inspired the respect of
thought and said what men who have no convictions but wish to seem to
humble origin (as in fact many did), caused prince andrew to cherish his
with turkey in 1811 independently of kutúzov, and found that peace had

“because it’s useless.”

on. the preoccupation and despondency which pierre had noticed in his
they sat a little while downstairs near his room till they had left off
“i know that she loves... will love you,” princess mary corrected

ago this suddenly happened.” she understood those words to mean that he
joyously festive mood reigned in the city. everyone believed the victory
not carry the weapon in his hand through the streets. it was difficult
can you ask such a question?”

letter are not destroyed, then you will have nothing but the consolation
broke up two squares, your excellency.”
in the past he had never been able to find that great inscrutable
had become habitual to him in speaking of the present war.
anna mikháylovna, though her circumstances had improved, was still

that he too seemed ashamed of the hussar of the line.
have expended millions, when you are in alliance with england, and when
today?” was his first thought. “and i did not know this suffering
he immediately dispatched adjutant general wintzingerode, who was in
    chapter x
understand it so differently. he collected all his strength, to stir and
at her shoulders) “like diana’s....”
seduced, and to whom her poor mother (sa pauvre mère) appeared, and
at the council of war in 1805: there was now a panic fear of napoleon’s
well-fed but not overfat horse that feels himself in harness and grows
them all for a drive in his troyka, proposed to take with them about a

to hold herself with particular dignity, and always spoke rapturously
with their mother. the harmony between him and his wife grew closer and
it, covering his face with his hands.
right—he did not know. “but was it really not possible for kutúzov
councilor of state, and insisted on the young man accompanying him to
“papa,” said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before,
“yes, yes, go and tell them to get it ready,” she answered,
refusing what she wanted. in my perplexity i did not know whose aid and



palace, when he had suddenly felt that wealth, power, and life—all that
to a different world and who could not know and understand his past. as
those wills first tolerated and then destroyed them.
edge, but never losing sight of the moving french. that morning,
flag let it fall from his hands. it swayed and fell, but caught on the
vigorous and alert, entering potëmkin’s gaily colored tent, and a
“ha, ha, ha! bravo, nicholas iványch! ha, ha, ha!”

wonder-working icon of smolénsk.
found them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to look at or listen to
army’s inactivity, he alone continued to assert that the battle of
guns were advanced, the artillerymen blew the ash off their linstocks,
foot, and galloped on.
troops in turn should enter moscow à la maraude * to obtain provisions
to himself, for in him alone is truth and peace,” said she in a voice
river, and zúbova, and in the krémlin.... just look! there’s not half of
dólokhov with a cold smile and a gleam in his handsome insolent eyes
of dogs. only the delighted “uncle” dismounted, and cut off a pad,
from vyázma onwards the french army, which had till then moved in three
run out—went round above the ravine.
pushed back in the sitting room where the count and márya dmítrievna
expected back every minute.

his nose, and greedily sniffed at it.
“at first i did not like it much, because what makes a town pleasant
putrefaction and hospital air. on the stairs he met a russian army
tomorrow?”
despite the doctor’s orders that she should not go out early in the

wish and natásha would jump up and run to fulfill it.
24th november
“it’s different on different days,” answered the captain. “one

kutúzov’s words were hardly understood by the troops. no one could have

after a short silence the countess spoke again but this time no one

acknowledged that the theorists are often one-sided, and therefore one
old soldier of placid temperament, being also upset by all the delay,
“yes, that’s it! that’s just what i said to him,” put in nicholas, who
plan, and there was no intention of retiring farther. the emperor
mytíshchi a mile and a half away, and through the night came the noise
understand. how is it you have loved a man for a whole year and
detailed and exact orders as to measures to be taken immediately

looted.
“inform the prince that i the bridge fired!” said the colonel
bridge, cross it, and now with their whole army are on this side of the
essence of the soul and does not require an object. now again i feel
if the matter concerned some brief conflict in which only a small number
of all our levies, both those now barring the enemy’s path and those
to make out the pattern.
mary. they had evidently both formed the same resolution; the eyes of

the battle of austerlitz began said that it would be lost, he alone, in
personalities, and the less was it possible to arrive at any general
and without waiting for an answer from the sentinel, who had stepped
therefore—to see it and enjoy its contemplation—he naturally threw away
have written to alexander: “my respected brother, i consent to restore
nothing, hurried nowhere, and were ending their days leisurely; when he
at otrádnoe she had fallen in love with him. it was as if she feared
himself takes part in the event.


sides, crushing human bodies, and that terrible work which was not done

not exactly hear his words but understood them from the movement of his
“adieu, ma bonne,” answered prince vasíli turning away from her.
strength of soul and mind called genius. this power cannot be based on
does not even attempt to hide its artificiality) of a man who is
pretend not to doubt it. and he acted accordingly.
“well, that’s it then! you know that there is a there and there is a
be parted from her) would be gained, so pacifying himself with this
“when am i to receive the money, count?”
seriousness of his stupid smile, could not but give him a moment’s
an unconsciously happy smile. occasionally he rose and walked about the
door leading downstairs), “only it won’t be accepted.”

tsarévich should not be with the army. do you know what he said to the
to turn the count’s heavy body toward the wall.
in november, 1805, announcing that he and his son would be paying him
was very valuable. officers who approached him with disturbed
taking up a pack he prepared to deal. rostóv submissively unbent the
“tell me, my dear,” said she to natásha, “is mimi a relation of
wished to make some suggestion. but prince vasíli interrupted him in
little nicholas and his education, her brother andrew, and religion
the word of command rang out, and again the regiment quivered, as with a
so near him than the wine of her charm rose to his head, and he
but unabashed.
faster still the two troykas flew side by side, and faster moved
heart.
all, addressing natásha directly.




on them all. he thought that, as in africa he had to put on a burnoose
and yet loved him. i experienced that feeling of love which is the very

a sort of presentiment that it would not come off. she is a sterile
representative of the russian nation, “and to prove to your majesty by
enlighten their minds, by means handed on to us by tradition from those


as she read she glanced at the sleeping natásha, trying to find in her
out whether she was considering what he had just said or whether she was
and did her hair, her ill-chosen words, and her jealousy—she was jealous
because other russians, sitting in warm rooms, proposed that they should
others. he was instinctively and thoroughly convinced that it was
her face in her handkerchief, and her whole stout body shook with
at the field of battle as he was, and, as it seemed to him, with the

dark-haired general who was just ascending the knoll.
sometimes spend a whole night at his writing table. he worked well
now taken possession of her—the life of a world of strenuous and free
sounded and you’ll be in a pretty position without your boots!” (the

chapter xxv
for god. but how did god enjoin that law? and why was the son...?”
roaring and snapping and rising louder and louder, and then words of
the same waistcoat and high white stock he had worn at the meeting of
and a cocked hat standing apart from his suite in front of his tent on
“you did not get my letter?” he asked, and not waiting for a
the church bells everywhere were ringing for service, just as usual on
son of a dishonest father, the misconduct of a woman who had fallen
anna mikháylovna’s was the most distinct.
man’s consciousness of freedom is to be reconciled with the law of
saddle. on all sides, the hussars were busy with the dragoons; one was
the whole of his army service. when he related anything it was generally
by cares for the present, seemed already to belong to the past. now she
glass of madeira for him.
servants with lanterns were bustling about in the porch. the immense
pierre with an amused smile, evidently in that cheerful mood of good

    chapter xxxiii
mamma are now provided for—i have arranged that rent for them in the
more carts and carriages, and the rostóvs were being shouted at to move
supplies will be bought from them at such prices as seller and buyer may
from early morning strenuous activities and efforts had begun and by ten
of austria, and having, as his historian tells us, tenderly embraced the
on our army, and as for him, he ought, it seems to me, not to live. if
campaign. the frenchman, confusing the austrians with the russians, was

life’s turmoil, for in his mind the memory of joseph alexéevich was
had any orders to give. pétya and natásha on the contrary, far from
“that will do, please, that will do. have the goodness—please, sir, to

“do you speak french?” the officer asked again, keeping at a distance
briskly from corner to corner of the room, looking straight before him
own life—is just what makes the choice of occupation insolubly difficult
could be faintly heard. the men were forbidden to talk out loud, to
leading to the stalls on the side nearest the rostóvs’ box creaked,
take the money,” and he threw the purse to him and ran out of the inn.
dron got up and was about to say something, but alpátych interrupted
hoping to see a messenger from dólokhov.
in a pathetic whisper what had become of her husband who had remained
“ah, my friend!” she said, touching his arm as she had done her
it.
needed further proofs and it was necessary to wait.
he saw the whips in their red caps galloping along the edge of the

enemy!” declared natásha. “you want me to be miserable, you want us


and took a few hasty steps toward prince kozlóvski, the commander of
his son and seizing the little princess’ arm as if she would have run
“well then,” continued prince andrew to alpátych, “report to them as i
“you should go, go away at once, if you don’t feel strong enough to
all this must be done in good order (le tout se fera avec ordre et
become rosier, had curly dark hair, and, when merry and laughing, quite
officials of all kinds, tradesmen, artisans, and peasants—streamed into
the moan of that wounded beast (the french army) which betrayed its
pierre did not know that these troops were not, as bennigsen supposed,
when the princess, as if lost in a fog, had already staggered out of the
true gascon) and says: ‘i don’t recognize the world-famous austrian
without reasoning. with an affectation of respect which evidently struck

“ah, we were friends,” said kutúzov cheerfully. “all right, all right,
i’ll fetch a piece of cloth at once for such an honorable gentleman,

evidently he alone was not seeking anything for himself, nursed no
“why shouldn’t i marry her?” he asked his daughter. “she’ll
vent to her anger against anatole in words of abuse, márya dmítrievna
he drove through the town seeking anatole kurágin, at the thought of
head (the pains had just left her). strands of her black hair lay round

youthful expression in his friend’s face.
herself but letting her slender arms hang down as if expecting some
cannot tell us that it does not feel the law of attraction or repulsion

which she spoke of her exalted patroness, supported hélène’s wish.
forgetting the geographical position of the niemen, thought that what
chapter viii
many officers and generals in full parade uniform, whom he had to pass.
themselves.

convinced themselves that the hounds had separated into two packs: the
for his manner. what a good fellow uncle is! don’t you think so?...

it were falling and he dozed off. dinner was brought him.
pierre’s animation that his visit had been interesting and that he had
“oh, come now! as if you could come at a wrong time!” said borís,


lilac shawl on her head, suggested a delicate exotic plant thrown out

honorable, count,” or, “were he as clever as you,” and so on,
was, as it were, a war trophy. nicholas felt this, it seemed to him
the scene of the third act represented a palace in which many candles


special qualities, on the contrary he needs the absence of the highest
stood with wide-open eyes and mouths, straining with all their strength,
some carriages waiting, and as soon as pierre stepped out of the gate
wrongs, the movement of troops into prussia—undertaken (as it seemed to
“what is ‘the talk of all moscow’?” pierre asked angrily, rising to his
touched her hand as she did not reply.
supposed, share the general russian antipathy to the austrians which was
of christian men professing the law of love of their fellows slew one
position.”

for this purpose a capable officer, bolkhovítinov, was chosen, who
to his person, the little man in the gray overcoat got up and, having
chapter x
what they were doing, though they would have been glad to leave off,
that pierre could no longer see the reddish-yellow face with its gray
and squeezing desperately, had cleared off the bridge and the troops
as he always did when at the front, solemn and stern. then came the word
version posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site

nicholas rostóv experienced this blissful condition to the full when,

tall as they. it was an enormous tree, its girth twice as great as a
of several thousand men could produce. the lights spread farther and
bees. they have almost all died unawares, sitting in the sanctuary they
neighboring villages with ilyín; he let lavrúshka have another horse and
words, and so it was.
should annihilate him, but then feels that his arm drops powerless and
coincidence of occurrences such as happens with all the phenomena of
foreign cavalry with red epaulets, probably french. he could see nothing
refined ways, and the state of dove-like purity she was now in (she wore
been looking at.
his eyes at the sight.
them we find; and each separate cause or whole series of causes appears
emperor noticed her and honored her with a dance.
stood rather far off and could not hear all that the emperor said. from
incline to make it something like a road. the wounded, bandaged with
    chapter xx
from his cheek. prince andrew forced his way to him.

knew, sat and turned to look first at one and then at another, and their

permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. to
to have any children by me.”
alarm on seeing her mistress.
from behind, alluding to his shabby cart horse, “only i didn’t wish to
old bolkónski had always had a poor opinion of prince vasíli’s
“don’t be unkind,” cried anna pávlovna from her end of the table
“yes, she is right,” thought the old princess, all her convictions

departure next morning, she went to her room and remained alone with her
to do with this man?” he added, addressing himself to pierre as to a
determination, looking at his watch. “it will be too late. it is quite
at them, began to disport themselves in the dark sky: now flaring

will be here any day now, so what are we waiting for? i ask just one


everyone in the house realized for whose sake prince andrew came, and
the tsar with another glance at the emperor francis, as if inviting
“gentlemen, i thank you all; all arms have behaved heroically:
twist about as you may, you will have to come to bennigsen eventually.
“he asked you, and vasíli dmítrich * is also going.”
unsatisfactory, but worst of all was his customary couch in the study.
attained: the transition from retreat to advance, an exposure of the
face, screwed up his eyes, and pensively swayed his head. at another


and loss of good looks, and involuntarily she examined her bare arm
to be quite alien to her when they met. just then julie, who by the
where there was no hope of soon taking part in a battle and had come to

ill on the journey. but the very difficulties and preoccupations of the
but i have killed her, killed... she won’t get over it! she won’t
“when i tell you that i must talk to you!...” repeated pierre.
sick, and the wounded.

see princess mary the day before and had there met—“whom do you think?
“did your mother tell you that it cannot be for a year?” asked
happen to them when they were free, but he insisted, though reluctantly,
“those are ours.”


“thank you very much, i will go on alone,” said prince andrew,
preoccupied him suddenly became illumined by a cold white light without
but resolute at the samovar—and questioned pierre. the curly-headed,
emperor had only just fallen asleep and so savary had to wait. at midday
pleasure of deceiving me, if it really were true. yes, if it were true,
shook her head disapprovingly and angrily at every solemn expression
    chapter xii
badly—all this debauchery, dissipation, and the rest of it!”
the clerk glanced round, evidently hoping that his joke would be
“and what a well-preserved man he was!” remarked the aide-de-camp.

from which he had fired. he swayed like a drunken man, taking some steps
chapter xiii
go, for god’s sake go! you see how i am suffering!” natásha cried
right on the other side.”
our members as much as possible to reform their hearts, to purify and
during this transfer he felt a little stronger and was able to look
throughout the whole cavalry division as váska denísov. cadet rostóv,

read in his face what preoccupied his own mind.
of men, reckoning those transporting and feeding the army—moved from the


place! we passed close to the park and saw two deer... and what a
evidently speránski liked to rest after his labors and find amusement
ahead of it, when it turns frequently the wave ahead of it also turns



necessity is increased and diminished depend on three considerations:
without being dull or angry, was silent, thoughtful, and preoccupied.
again he looked to the right and saw something running toward him across

borodinó had been occupied and the bridge over the kolochá was in the
in to inform the commander in chief of this and, availing himself

believing in the possibility of goodness and truth, but of seeing the
the strength of an army to be identical with its numbers. military
his power was limited. the armies were divided, there was no unity of
princess mary did not answer. she did not understand who was to go or
“hm...” said the count, and stopped.
only after some seconds that the impression produced by prince andrew’s
vainly wasted his efforts—which was a thing he never allowed to
mean ruin to his career, while to renew their former relations without
matters unrelated to his past interests, and he seized on these the more


“this, you see, is how i am finishing my days... death will come.
several other trains of vehicles similar to the rostóvs’, and as they
shopman.
“well begin!” said dólokhov.
you!”
and mingling with one another. he could also, by the gleam of bayonets
was going, to mítenka’s lodge and demanded an account of everything.

uhlans were galloping back, not to the place they had occupied but more
she thought very plain, affected, and dry. natásha suddenly shrank
soldiers used to tell of an evening (they were always the same), but
the eighth and largest group, which in its enormous numbers was to the
french quartermasters who had been sent on in advance.
out into the town. when lunatics command our armies god evidently means

sacrifice for; the fact of sacrificing in itself afforded him a new and
dandies, the lower part of his face hidden by his beaver collar and his
“it did me so much good to tell all about it today. it was hard and
owed him money! what baseness! what meanness! i know you understand
europe to allow to be destroyed. yes, that is what will happen to you.
it was far from being the same words or the same order that reached the
man’s mind cannot grasp the causes of events in their completeness, but
five minutes later ilyín, splashing through the mud, came running back

when pierre had gone and the members of the household met together, they
prince saltykóv, in which he insisted on the words being inserted that


whole trousseau. when they got home she turned everybody out of the room
his mouth awry, prepared to shout. the regiment fluttered like a bird

that i should meet her just when natásha’s engagement had been broken
looked round at his fellow prisoners and scrutinized them.

of his return.

been on his way back to russia long ago had not his wound unexpectedly
as moscow? that is the question on which i want your opinion,” and he
the housekeeper, the old nurse, the cooks, coachmen, maids, footmen,

the table in a merry mood, sitting down now by one, now by another, of
narýshkin, uvárov, dolgorúkov, apráksin, valúev, to the committee,
have to be sold, so that it was impossible to give it to véra. nor had
am fond of the officers, and i fancy the men also like me. i should be
away.
and appeal, which he would obtain from count rostopchín.
“mine, sir? all right. but how about you?”


old fellow? out of sorts?”
our false conception that an event is caused by a command which precedes
uniforms advanced toward the bridge at a run. smoke appeared again
realized what had happened, namely the loss of our position on the left
that the hussars must return quickly and fire the bridge.’”
on.
rostóv, in common with the whole army from which he came, was far
passing people who looked after him with curiosity, he entered the porch
across, snatched it from his hand and began reading it. pierre looked
little companion! i hope she will bring her along with her when we’re
tíkhon, understanding him, wiped away the tears.
before going down she went into the room where the icons hung and, her
whether he lived with his wife or not?

with the lofty heavens, his wife’s dead reproachful face, pierre at


when he returned to moscow pierre was handed a letter from márya

so that he too may benefit. after dinner i fell asleep and as i was
gelding, sitting at home in winter, and lying in his overgrown garden in

rostóv did not know or remember how he ran to his place and mounted.
which on that day wore an invariable look of solemn festivity.

horses; i told yákov alpátych so.”
very muscular men, and on the night of the battle, having arrived
alien to him and brimful of joys unknown to him, a different world,
pétya paced the room in silence for a time.
rostóv lay down again on his bed and thought complacently: “let

and patting berg on the shoulder he got up, wishing to end the

theodore had gone.
as tight as possible, and flying away! like this....”
young nicholas, who had gone into my study and broke all my things.”
door, and added in a whisper so that her son should not hear, “wish me
to leave the city, others on the contrary said that all the icons had
madonna was depicted playing at stick and ball. the ball represented the
for the first time vividly imagined what was in store for her there at
and by what right he allowed himself to claim quarters that were already

dolgorúkov; and though you may not know it, the fact is that now
questions and answers were heard. the publican, taking advantage of the

from the standpoint from which the science of history now regards its
humanity’s movement. the most usual generalizations adopted by almost
rose in alarm on seeing it.

“ah, you’re back?”
file—of whom there are always the greatest number; of the next higher
men so painstakingly acquire and guard—if it has any worth has so only
fault with us.”
he would say a lot of pleasant things, ask you to dinner” (“that

they were over. after his liberation he reached orël, and on the third
about the princess’ health and then led pierre along a stone passage.

rostóv, standing in the front lines of kutúzov’s army which the tsar
much food and fresh troops awaited them in smolénsk, nor that they were
i told him everything as best i could, and told him what i had proposed
but pierre was not listening to the woman. he had for some seconds been

“dearest,” said the little princess after breakfast on the morning
a comforting belief in future life, retribution, recompense, and
“oh, there was childish love?” suddenly asked prince andrew,
“oh goodness! what has happened? really it was not my fault!”

learned military authorities quite seriously tell us that kutúzov should
any heroic feelings), and the whole innumerable multitude of such
been senseless, it was impossible.

“captain, for god’s sake! i’ve hurt my arm,” he said timidly.

especially attracted his attention. the peasant seemed to him not merely
minister’s son was, with his rosy cheeks and dark eyebrows, and with
to her as to how she would order her life now, after that. these were
flourishing his arm and saying something with a stern look. the
way, the rumors current among the people of an invasion by antichrist,
saying that, on the contrary, she remembered him quite well. then
and who was called tit. he was saying, “tit, i say, tit!”

to where the horses stood saddled.
and soldiers of the french army knew it could not be done, because the
would forget something that had just occurred, or take a false step with
laughed. “i dreamed last night...”—“you were not expecting
aside out of his salary proved a dream. not only did he not save
who loves is capable, evidently suffering himself, he shook his fists at

“that’s it, that’s it!” exclaimed the count, and gaily seizing
quits... it can’t be!... and why is he doing this to me?” rostóv
words to the soldiers who were carrying him, now with his eyes fixed
itself, a petty german town, rostóv saw the emperor again. in the
he explained his wish to be present at the battle and to see the
not forsake him. he will fulfill his vocation and crush the hydra of

prince andrew felt that either the actions of kutúzov’s army

me, it hurts. i’m old and weak and this is what you wanted. well then,

difficulty.
speaker.
bolkónski but over all russia, shut out all other considerations.
humanity.
to show that they are not at all impatient for their food. the host and
discomfiture, came to town bringing rye, oats, and hay, and beat down
through the frost-bound air.
the women’s vehicles drove by. behind them came more carts, soldiers,

consummate coquette, she could not have maneuvered better on meeting a

cards, holding them in his hand, and lifting his head, “if it comes out,
bilíbin’s sleeve. “but i love them, you know, and don’t want to distress
“yes,” replied a footman in a bold loud voice, as if anything were
i trouble myself about you, and you also know quite well that what i
bridge. the crowd, crushing one another, upsetting carts, and shouting
soldiers handed up the charges, turned, loaded, and did their business
previously.
you understand that my sole desire is conscientiously to carry out his
worldly sciences of physics, history, chemistry, and the like, into
as you and princess mary call it, are the chief source of all error and


and sometimes like a log floating down the river, an officers’ or
whatever happens and whoever may stand at the head of affairs, the
smooth as a sign that the conversation was at an end.
berg smiled again.
captivity he had learned that in karatáev god was greater, more infinite


paulucci, whom he had known in turkey, into the drawing room where the
a footman came in to summon borís—the princess was going. pierre, in
bogdánovna.
him through the troops. on reaching the broad river víliya, he stopped
“well, never mind; i only...”
left?” thought nicholas. “are we getting to the melyukóvs’? is
matter—something independent of cleverness and knowledge. prince
the deliverance of russia from hostile invasion.

dogs, but i went on undismayed. suddenly a smallish dog seized my left
into the water. he tried to right himself but fell in up to his waist.
and were taking up, or preparing to take up, their positions for the

berg’s proposal was at first received with a perplexity that was not
has gone? eh, what people! ‘against god’s might our hands can’t fight.’”
sire, mon cousin, prince d’eckmühl, roi de naples, and so on. but these


and moved to the right; from behind it, dispersing the laggards, came
only the expression of the will of the deity, not dependent on time, can
“then you are russians?” the peasant asked again.
evidently likes me so much. and why not enjoy myself?” thought
intimacy with mademoiselle bourienne. the idea that at the first moment
the emperor for having moved his army along the ryazán road, and the
anatole had a passport, an order for post horses, ten thousand rubles
not venture to ask any questions, and shut the door again, now sitting
kind of civility that this device of placing a channel was employed. he

“i helped you, but all the same i must tell you the truth; it is a
characteristic of genius. even that final running away, described in
and went to meet a tall, bald, fair man of about forty with a large open
was still burning, and the same shirtlike sphinx lay near the door; but


himself in the crowd) that they could not let the princess go, that

everything depend on her daughter’s inclination. she invited nicholas
troops were running onto the bridge, was about to fire, but lannes
the girl in white went up to the prompter’s box and a man with tight
of race among these people—this eighth and largest party of those


apparent—such as the commands of the general, the equipment employed,
returning to his hobby; “tell me how the germans have taught you to
slackened, she felt her tears dry up and her sobs ceased. she suddenly
made a flank march to such and such a place, tormásov to another place,
to anyone that the wounded should be left behind and the goods carted

her knees after her young lady.

“is he weaker? thinner?” asked the princess.
answer the old prince without expressing views of his own, he now
confused and ever-increasing crowds were running back to where five
and tear whatever came to his hand. “why did i tell her that ‘je
vindicating her husband, “but only after they are a year old or so...”
saw friendly looks and heard friendly words. yesterday’s adjutant
actions that seem to us less free the better we understand their cause.

andrew.

“i must... i must have a talk with you,” said prince andrew. “you
learning, was well brought up, and had a pleasant voice; what she said
as is always the case at a departure, much had been forgotten or put in


dependent on her and living in her house. she felt sorry for her
the dirty maidservant stepped from behind the trunk, put up her plait,
even my maid has taken to being rude. at this rate they will soon begin
“if only they don’t make me responsible for this delay! what a nuisance
i’ll find you another place.”
seized a biscuit, and as if fearing to be too late, again shouted
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written
liberating his serfs he had obtained the reputation of being a liberal.


with happy, exhausted faces, they laid the old wolf, alive, on a shying
and the two emperors were living with their suites, households, and

    chapter xi
to the maid, “bring the princess her gray dress, and you’ll see,

cannot be imagined or adequately praised!” said berg, glancing round
natásha with his eyes and asked the count which was his daughter.
when pierre and his wife had left, he grew very quiet and began to

inhabitants of moscow wished to be armed, weapons were ready for them
rapier gracefully and politely, hand it to their magnanimous conqueror,
our troops were known to him as far as they could be known to anyone
returned), and, forcing open a loosely closed latch, set the damask
garden.
“well, stand us some of your herb vodka, túshin,” it said.
“all the same i shan’t sleep. what silliness, to sleep! mummy!

subject to the law of necessity; but it does not advance by a hair’s

for no one believed it to be possible; it resulted from a most complex
dangers.


“good-by, my dear fellow.... his words are music, i never tire of

natásha’s having rejected him) and again asked nicholas to retire from
and bind karp. the men obediently came out of the crowd and began taking
marshal; he pressed the hands of some and nodded to others. his adjutant

for her intervention.

it was a warm, rainy, autumnal day. the wide expanse that opened out


the weather had cleared again since noon and the sun was descending
reason but by something else. there was within him a deep unexpressed

not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription
“i have come with my mother to see the count, but it seems he is not
voice, “but believe me, i so adore your daughter and all your family

accordance with the enemy’s movements.

new in them was a certain uneasiness and occasional discord, which there
entrenchments being thrown up, the freshly dug clay of which showed up
nicholas did not hear his own cry nor feel that he was galloping, nor
pierre—there was something resembling what he had seen on the face of
by their redness to contrast more than usual with his gray hair. at the
cursed the day before and will curse again a month later.

their arrival. his face looked sad, and he had grown still stouter since
“the potatoes are grand!” he said once more. “eat some like that!”
she had feared, order her to be carried away by force but only told her

against the palings with its face smeared with soot.

banging the table with a determined and drunken gesture and preparing to
gentlemen, let us act! time is most precious....”
“come to your papa at once, please!” said she with a strange, excited
beside hélène. “this happiness is not for you,” some inner voice
rose from an ensign and became emperor. well, well, god grant it,” he
particularly pleased her. she listened joyfully (as though she had not
“yes, i saw him,” she said.
to anyone, took his cap and left the house by the back door, trying to
weren’t told anything. there were some twenty of us lying there. we had
one.... whom, i ask you, can we rely on?... england with her commercial
something on the candlestick.


“and how does he now regard the matter?” asked pierre, referring to
his face, which had been scratched till it bled by his falling against
hail, following a track freshly made by the artillery over the furrows
any administrative or public business whatever from the lowest to the

anísya fëdorovna, with her light step, willingly went to fulfill her


to recollect something. prince andrew stepped forward from among the

them with his hand.
things and supper dishes stood in disorder, and in the middle of the
each other’s arms warmly pressing their lips to whatever place they
and began to cry.

of hope. the previous autumn, the hunting, “uncle,” and the christmas
to cruel with his subordinates, and went into everything down to the
at dólokhov and his eyes dropped, the something terrible and monstrous
with trembling hands natásha held that passionate love letter which

“so much the better! i shall see it close,” he thought.
questions: where was he going? how was he wounded? was it serious? and
    chapter xviii


this contradiction arises from the fact that military science assumes
hammering them, we’re to receive double kits!”


distance, but down the hill before him. “it’s the french!”


provisions, of which (according to the french historians) there were
“it’s a long time since we met,” he said. “thanks for coming.
the soldiers simply held their sides as they watched him.
chapter xiv

alone at last gains a real victory, destroying the spell of the
lise sighed too.
unfolded itself in his soul as if freed from the bondage of life that
the russian army) are nothing compared to what this man has been doing

the army, took none of these steps.
“you’re welcome, yákov alpátych. folks are leaving the town, but you
still feeling his eyes gazing at her.
as i know, that girl is not the kind of girl who could please prince
a universal favorite: a very pleasant position, and intoxicatingly so
and especially the deep and tender sorrow expressed in all her features
presented a very sad and depressing spectacle.
coat and cap for pierre, and promised to get him the pistol next day.

and i beg you all to help me. brünn’s attractions must be shown him.
censured, should not be held to blame.
maintained with heat that peace was impossible between a legitimate
conversation from changing its ordinary character of gossip about the
honor!” he paused. “i missed you at bucharest, but i needed someone to
“your honor, i thought...”
him, from his weary, bored expression to his quiet, measured step,
a red ball through the dust, burned and scorched his back intolerably

were crossing themselves. rostóv no longer looked at the colonel, he
of the club from the day it was founded. to him the club entrusted the

general conclusion which he had arrived at from his interview with
specialist historians describing the campaign of 1813 or the restoration
once noticed that her mistress leaned out of the window and smiled at
let princess mary pass into the room before her, the princess felt the

compared to the lofty, equitable, and kindly sky which he had seen and

thermopylae. so why should he have made such a sacrifice? and why expose
which pierre spoke of that dead father, and from the careful, reverent

“why, you remember before you went away?... well, she says you are to
    chapter ix
to sit down and make themselves at home, and then went out of the room.
french—who from being foes had suddenly become friends—that had
absence. he, as i wrote you before, has changed very much of late. after
charm and poetry of love, yet he told his story with such sincere
because he could not. in the middle of a figure he beckoned to rostóv

the tears from his eyes and from the letter, then having dried her
sit down, but fell. the other, a short sturdy soldier with a shawl
“ah, princess mary!” he said suddenly in an unnatural voice,
was what an ukáse emanating from the highest authority should not say.

of whether he were heard or not.
retreating forces.
russian commanders. here besides the law of retrospection, which regards

cards and supper were over, but the visitors had not yet dispersed.


wrong, lads!”
badness of the road from petersburg to moscow and of his petersburg
stood in front of him also listening and smiling. nicholas did not take

guns smashed, and no supports at all.”

exclamation he was asking the adjutant to wait, and he went on with the
long and warmly to the emperor and how the emperor, evidently weeping,
    chapter vii

he had an inkpot, and sat down to write.
from the anteroom berg ran with smooth though impatient steps into the
a man.”
atmosphere. they marched with handkerchiefs tied over their noses and

young ladies prepared and that never reached the wounded, and so on.
having arranged matters thus, denísov and dólokhov intended, without

yard... mamma!... it’s impossible!”
chapter xv
his lifted hand with a bright and proud smile.

“say what you like,” exclaimed sónya, in a despairing voice as she
inseparably interconnected infinitesimal elements of free will.
kutúzov turned round without answering and his eye happened to fall
you know, chiefly directed to political questions. he cannot endure
“ah, she has come!” thought he.
enemy’s horse patrols could be discerned.
chapter xix
the campaign and the two battles in which he had taken part, and his
great men,” says history. and, indeed, human reason replies: every time
from that day an awakening from life came to prince andrew together with
chapter xxiii
that the convoy had fifteen hundred men. denísov had two hundred, and
countess mary was jealous of this passion of her husband’s and regretted
presently. i am delighted to meet a compatriot. well, and what are we
“gave him leave? leave? that’s just like you young men,” said the

present. what had happened was that news (which afterwards proved to be

brother, kissed him, and unable to restrain her tears any longer began
suburb.


“i’ll show you, i’ll show you! it’s not a secret. and it’s a
soldier after camp life. despite his rapid journey and sleepless night,
“i will,” replied natásha.
hit him so pat, stwaight on his snout... ‘ah, what a... what a...!’
letter to her father. the next day the old prince said to her quietly:

and with an eager face nicholas began to speak of the possibility of
rage, “who are you? are you in command here? eh? i am commander here,
the countess tried to frown, but could not. márya dmítrievna shook her
mikháylovna pass and did not evince the least surprise at seeing them
had been drawn up on the supposition that moscow was still in our hands,
moscow and go nowhere? no, i won’t let you off! mademoiselle george

never felt any hesitation in dealing with the peasants. he knew that his
eyes at those who were passing. glancing in at the door, rostóv
interrupted her.
be unable to live for a single moment.
“ma foi, sire, nous ferons ce qui sera dans notre possibilité,

“well it won’t be for long. next summer i’ll take him to petersburg,”

the emperor alexander wished for peace, but would not enter into
“what is the matter, mary?”
having sat some time at table, speránski corked a bottle of wine and,

“in peace let us pray unto the lord.”
the bustle and terror of the rostóvs’ last days in moscow stifled the
it would have been difficult for a face to express greater respect and
it seemed to daniel irksome and improper to be in a room at all, but to

on buonaparte, who only at bald hills in the whole world, it seems, is
“but military men have told me that it is impossible to fight in the
the expression of the will of someone endowed with power, but that
her alone, that early and terrible death has had the most beneficent
met the regiment announced that all the huts were full of sick and dead
a batiste shirt that he had evidently only just put on, standing in that
from the highest quarters a confirmation of what they wanted to believe,
“if you won’t answer, i’ll tell you...” hélène went on. “you
these rooms. anna mikháylovna, addressing a maid who was hurrying past
me, the commander in chief, than to him.”
by his talk with murat, he did not rise or even stir, but scowled still
“why are they down on me?” thought túshin, looking in alarm at his
life was very hard, but he also knew that he could not help tormenting
and took aim at the french. “fire!” repeated the officer once more,
previously had listened to the discussion at the austerlitz council of
the society gathered together at the governor’s was the best in
of the princess who—she thought—was making a favor of receiving her,
made and highly valued. the old count came up to them and pressed
conversation. prince bolkónski listened as a presiding judge receives a
“well, now, good-by!” he gave his son his hand to kiss, and embraced
wound bandaged. water was being sprinkled on his face. as soon as prince
trampling through the deep snow, and muttering incoherent words:
also intending to shout at him, but on recognizing him he nodded.
the room....”

at all in accord with the accepted tone of the moment. but the general

and drew it downwards as if wishing to ascertain whether it was firmly
“well then, till tomorrow at sokólniki,” said dólokhov, as he took

eyes to him, but there was such confident tenderness in his affectionate
of greeting, he asked pierre whether the soldier platoche to whom he had
elsewhere—in the relation to the people of the man who wields the power.
what had happened. he alone then understood the meaning of the french

it seemed to princess mary in an unpleasantly affected way. (this was
    chapter i
heroism!”
guns on the hillock.
modeling and modeling you must get smeared with clay,” suggesting


anything. do you know i have sent for pierre? the count,” pointing to

asked kutúzov, interrupting him.
landowner in the vílna province, offered his country house for the fete,
man can be master of nothing while he fears death, but he who does not
princess mary’s face.
of the coach with wide open eyes, and the expression in them which the
eyes attracted him irresistibly.
français,” said dolgorúkov, with grave satisfaction. “good,
his gray hair.

unobtrusively to bind the hands of the protectors of disorder and to
“we couldn’t take murat prisoner this morning or get to the place in
“good-by, princess!” said he.
mystical book i am sending you; it has an enormous success here. though
power only because they fulfill the will of the people which has been
anything to get just what he liked done always. he had only to express a
protested balashëv, “but permit me to observe that i have the honor to

in it. every sphere of work was connected, in his eyes, with evil and
every day he said to himself one and the same thing: “it is time i
she had entered. she knew it to be necessary, and though it was hard for
because at the broken bridge across that river the calamities their army
out of rostopchín’s private room.
flung out violently.


of his trap. a french cook accused of being a spy was being flogged. the
came out—wearing a velvet coat with a single star on his breast,
“who? kutúzov?” asked rostóv.
to the austrian emperor and smiled.
she had counted on her fingers with borís after they had kissed four
in thy mercy; smite down our enemies and destroy them swiftly beneath
words but could not distinguish them. the din of many voices was too
to him senseless, he understood and was not surprised at it.
help and strengthen me that i may walk in thy ways! read the scriptures,
darkness, the man paused, then moved with cautious steps toward the
“cette ville asiatique aux innombrables églises, moscou la sainte. la
“talk indeed!” cried the thin one. “in my three shops here i have a
on anything. it was about this choice that prince andrew was speaking.
with his small hand.
smiled at me yesterday and asked me to come again, and i love her, and
collected his men and with shouts and quarrels forced his way in among
     sighing its message out to thee...

already seen the young master, and, before he had reached the drawing
petersburg, he should tell her so afresh.
“a perfect picture! how he chased a fox out of the rank grass by the

third company he suddenly stopped. his suite, not having expected this,
had expected, at his first glance at her his face assumed a cold, stiff,

it was not the dress, but the face and whole figure of princess mary
pierre no longer suffered moments of despair, hypochondria, and disgust
take it and hand it personally to the french emperor. when dispatching
“what can one say or think of as a consolation?” said pierre. “nothing!
not in his heart at once agree with her that what he had regarded
happen.

bolkhovítinov told him everything and was then silent, awaiting
and here’s the little shop where we used to buy gingerbread! can’t
everyone must have personal hopes, princess mary in the profoundest
princess, his cousin, at moscow, concerning dólokhov’s intimacy with


brothers,” said he. “mother moscow, the white...” his voice faltered,

nothing about it and have not thought about it. moscow is chiefly busy





     * and all that follows therefrom.
in these difficult circumstances. the empress márya, concerned for
youngest, at home. father, he says, ‘all my children are the same to
bolkónski was not announced; prince andrew insisted on that. he said
    * “europe will never be our sincere ally.”

continued, with that gay brotherly cordiality which goodhearted young
why are you hindering us?” another in the same place turned round and
with that object he had asked gerásim to get him a peasant’s coat and

the people in the defense of moscow, pierre had met the rostóvs and
to her and kissed her warmly. anatole went up to kiss the little
permitting himself to kiss her hand.
“i bet fifty imperials”—he spoke french that the englishman might
had aroused and flew off after the hounds. the count, like a punished

“clear that away!” said the officer, pointing to the beams and the
about in it. all this naked white human flesh, laughing and shrieking,
the front. i held my sword in my left hand, count. all our family—the
more cheerful in his presence, and were evidently anxious to display
“oh yes, an artful tale! follow her into slavery! pull down your houses
submissive, expressionless look with which he had listened to the
and beautiful building. i woke up. o lord, great architect of nature,
marrying for money—i consider that dishonorable—but a wife should
be divorced from her husband (had such a report spread many would have
in julie’s set, as in many other circles in moscow, it had been agreed
“he did,” replied shinshín. “he was in the caucasus and ran
how did it begin? i traveled from moscow with prince vasíli. then there
celebration of the season.
“oh, how terrible,” said sónya returning from the yard chilled and
suddenly awoke with a start and in a cold perspiration.

carriage and rode up to dólokhov.

wounded, and one knocked out,” he added, unable to restrain a happy

commanders. and then that happy moment, that toulon for which he had
“yes, that is true, prince. in our days,” continued
to the old conditions of life, nicholas found it very pleasant to be
orders to get ready.
irresolution communicated itself to the men.
it to you. do you remember?”
the count danced well and knew it. but his partner could not and did not

world, but we are a different matter...”—without knowing why or how this
    chapter xiii
“no, i won’t,” said pierre, pushing anatole aside, and he went up
receipt, he left at the end of november, without taking leave of any of

himself knew it, and to escape personal responsibility they had all
and, as always happens, had got somewhere, but not to their appointed
a space like a street was left between each two lines of troops. the
around. the flames flared up again, lighting the animated, delighted,
assuming quite the pose of a society woman (heaven knows when and where
tenths of the men of our left flank had fallen and the full force of the
sónya sighed and made no reply. the count, pétya, madame schoss, mávra
took a horse and a cossack from a cossack commander, and hungry and
a stuffy room, so a whiff of youthfulness, energy, and confidence of
conciliation were discussed. in that circle they discountenanced those
the same expression on his face again swayed his head.
forgotten for which servants were sent back, that they had decided to
soon as revolutions, conquests, or civil wars occur—that is, as soon as
“it’s that, that...” said sónya, with a white face and trembling lips.
shouting and lashing their horses, kept crossing from side to side. the
count bennigsen entered hurriedly, and nodding to bolkónski, but not
“why, for this reason! my father is one of the most remarkable men of
a catherine serve to express the life of the nation, which is evident
the officer who wished to go into action to distinguish himself; nor
a loud, monotonous voice began to read out the dispositions for the
the staff captain in his deep bass, calmly stroking his long mustache.
“there is still time, my dear. you must remember, catiche, that it was
horse and his mameluke, rustan. napoleon received balashëv in the very
or making her feel uncomfortable or displeased.
pierre admitted that it was true, and from that was gradually led by
the cobblestones, and the brilliant, hot sunshine were all full of that
months, where they were every moment fighting death from hunger and
saber had tasted flesh and he had fallen exhausted, and so on. and so he
guest.
formerly when he did not grasp what lay before him or was said to
and yet be happy....”
had gone to see his father, could not explain his absence to herself.
they be before the faces of thy faithful warriors as dust before the
footmen, and awaited each expected dish with some anxiety. everything

borís was excited by the thought of being so close to the higher powers
and making pencil notes on them, and for the first two or three minutes

speed before they saw one another—pierre put out his hands and seized
quite beside himself, pétya, clinching his teeth and rolling his eyes
each time with fresh pleasure and each time discovered in it fresh
napoleon’s eyes prince andrew thought of the insignificance of
spiritual needs, while it seems to me that animal happiness is the only
after the other.

of having been dutiful et tout ce qui s’ensuit!* that’s certain.”
only suppositions, which seemed important to the younger men but not to
russians possessed would have been required.
heard around the campfires, dólokhov turned into the courtyard of the
commander in chief, nor the place where the troops are stationed, nor by

of them forgot what was happening and what was about to happen in the
impossible to describe the movement of humanity without the conception
with a sense of relief at having performed a vexatious duty and did not

had been repulsed, employing this military term to describe what had
buttoning up his uniform. it seemed that he had quite forgotten pierre.


where he stood.
he was looking at her shoulders, and she involuntarily caught his eye
of delighted amazement.
chapter x
marched, followed only by their escort and the vehicles and wagons
no. 17 of the captured russians, arrested and detained for some reason
enough, at the end of the feast proposed the emperor’s health. “not
(1) power is the relation of a given person to other individuals,
was sitting at a small table, chattering with másha, her maid. she grew
dron, whom the old prince called by the diminutive “drónushka.”
smoothing down her dress with an inquiring look at her mother, when


servants’ quarters.
    chapter xiii
greater or lesser dependence on the causes in relation to which we
with a bashful and awkward gesture not at all like a military salute
“why did you push yourself in there by daylight? you ass! well, why
of the hosts, as many as a hundred visitors would gather there for a day
and borís. he is his godson,” she added, her tone suggesting that
till may, and asked him to be more economical this time. nicholas had

to you? why doesn’t he come to the house?”
do if i love him and the other one too?” she asked herself, unable to

two candles. on the table was a pile of gold and paper money, and he
doubted the necessity of taking an active share in life, just as a month

and madame kwüdener, and wead ecka’tshausen and the bwethwen. oh, they
of people shouting at a tavern mamónov’s cossacks had set up across the
among his generals and marshals at the rear of his suite. those sent to
took his seat and told the coachman to drive him to his country house in

and without a word to his wife he went to the little sitting room and

themselves in the soft mud. rostóv joined them. in the middle of the
“true enough,” answered nesvítski; “two smart fellows could have
spot” (he stooped and pointed to the sloping ledge outside the window)
impossible in the heat of battle to say what was happening at any given
the faces of officers and men brightened up at the sound. everyone got
themselves. the deeper we delve in search of these causes the more of
flattering to him. at first it seemed strange that the son of an obscure

chapter xviii
so sensibly employed the best and simplest means to attain his end was

the stores, the prisoners, and the marshal’s baggage train stopped at
that the incorrect and extraordinary statement was invented (probably to
which intimated that he knew what he was about and if others did not


the efforts of the old count, and instead of being degraded to the ranks
brain suddenly began to work with a vigor, clearness, and depth it had



away, to pursue its fatal path to smolénsk.
a man without convictions, without habits, without traditions, without
“well, karabákh! we’ll do some service tomorrow,” said he, sniffing its
“what rubbish sometimes enters one’s head!” thought prince andrew,

searching for an example, then with a clear, naïve look at bennigsen he
is interrupted. he listened to what langeron said, as if remarking,

with unclouded common sense, an incalculable number of causes present

from a courtier’s point of view (and in an emperor’s vicinity all became

pávlovna whispered the next words in advance, like an old woman
upon him, passed splendidly, lifting his feet with a high and graceful
“no, i won’t miss my opportunity now, as i did after austerlitz,”


nurse, praskóvya sávishna, who hardly ever came to that room as the
volume you have sent me and which has such success in moscow. yet since
this fortified camp constructed by pfuel, and till then considered
“where are all the folks going?”
you want of them. they are armed against you by the same experience
the sand, the bricks and roofs of the houses, the green church spire,
“yes, i think so,” said princess mary with a smile. “write to her
from the wormwood that grew along a boundary rut, rubbed them in his
involuntarily came closer to him.
to be severe, found nothing to say; the others did not venture to
back, “give me your hand.” she took her sister-in-law’s hand and
flush. it was hélène. natásha had not time to take off the bodice
hating barclay, rode to visit a friend of his own, a corps commander,
greatness, the unimportance of life which no one could understand, and
person.



and angry faces struggled for the mop: how differently do those clouds
opened his mouth when one of the senators, a man without a tooth in his
of him: when achilles has covered that tenth, the tortoise has covered
talk about that,” said natásha.
shadows, without perspective, without distinction of outline. all life
think it over. go! yes or no, yes or no, yes or no!” he still shouted

these questions, like questions put at trials generally, left the


“i think, princess, it is not convenient to speak of that now,”


unattractive.
hardly had they reached the bottom of the hill before their pace
thought that he, an exemplary officer of many years’ service who
in chess you may think over each move as long as you please and are not
to take such a step without father’s or mother’s consent! and now she’s
one of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young man with
another hussar also rushed toward the horse, but bondarénko had already
corps, which bennigsen and others may have had in view; nor the aim of
“has anything come from andrew?” she asked.
kissed princess mary’s hand. she did not know how she found the
attributing to it qualities of genius it does not possess. the best
“he’s chosen already,” said nicholas smiling.


of old beer. from sventsyáni they retired farther and farther to drissa,
near them and there too the dogs were lying. the huntsmen waved their
“why not, if he likes to?”
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  the fee is
then the voice said something more, demyán replied, and the steps in
and indignity.

should fascinate her husband as much as she did before he became her
not exist.


will now be distributed, and surely a pardon would be granted....”
soldiers lifted the canteen lids to their lips with reverential faces,
and the defect of frankness in their opinions. they feared napoleon,
had any significance, and that napoleon himself would be ashamed of them
“this is what i think. austria has been made a fool of, and she is
with him. there now, sídorov!”
his serene highness has passed through mozháysk in order to join up with
    chapter xxxviii
“count! your excellency, how come you to be here?” asked the doctor.

an old friend.
the scantily clad hélène smiled at everyone in the same way, and
beginning to guess what love is, derived the notion that his father had
was laughing at something, mingled in a merry sound, like the chirping
they say he blushed like a girl to whom joconde is read, when he said to

“yes, it is the same oak,” thought prince andrew, and all at once he
sound of his opponent’s voice.
“but they heard him at the council of war and will hear him when he


“at boss zides, captain,” he heard the voice of the colonel, who,
     * the illuminati sought to substitute republican for
it was no longer, as before, a dark, unseen river flowing through the
“and the old man said, ‘god will forgive you, we are all sinners in his
should let that fine fellow bonaparte loose—he’d knock all this nonsense
immediately. i won’t say another word to him,” thought pierre. he

is betraying us! russia alone must save europe. our gracious sovereign
“nicholas, when did you break your cameo?” she asked to change the
more individuality, originality, and independence. but if even one of

agitated.
“a likely thing, killing a fox our dogs had hunted! and it was my gray
days after the delivery of his speech at the lodge he lay on a sofa at


“well, thank god! we’ve been sitting here too long!”
pressed him still harder with proofs of the impossibility and above all
are led, modern history should study not the manifestations of power but
and unoccupied where, they thought, yet greater riches might be found.
“not let the wife have him?” said the old man, and laughed.
room without a word. but at the door he stopped and then retraced his
but managed meanwhile to look round repeatedly at his neighbor, the
prince andrew, evidently confused. “i know that out of a million

watching and it creaked very slightly as she disappeared behind it.
anatole was at the door, evidently on the lookout for the rostóvs.
being formed. but now they have had him transferred to my regiment and
soldier. i come home on leave and i’ll tell you how it was, i look and
the rain had stopped, and only the mist was falling and drops from
yesterday i learned that, despite the loyalty with which i have kept
in reaching the emperor—he even thought how surprised everyone would be


for the children. i am nursing and my milk was spoiled.... pétya was at
was found under the old merchant’s pillow. he was tried, knouted, and
“i take them back, i take them back!” said pierre, “and i ask you to
conception of the expression of will, referring it to man and not to the
vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the full
“i have the honor to report to you the actual truth,” said alpátych.


astronomy, physics, chemistry, botany, zoology, and so on, just in the
locality was known and shown in every detail on the maps, and bonaparte,

one has with these girls without their mother! i do so regret having
“that is all nonsense.” prince andrew again interrupted him, “let
had said. on hearing that he was going to petersburg natásha was
the conversation turned on the contemporary gossip about those in power,
craft exposed, he should have appeared to them what he appeared ten


laugh—a laugh such as one hears on the stage. someone—it sounded
be good as a minister, but as a general he is not merely bad but
energetic gesture of inquiry with his small white plump hand.

all as they should be? that’s right! the great thing is the serving,
part—transfer the will of the people to a new ruler? in international
any moment the emperor may see them.... but no, these must be only a
not to let him see her cheered princess mary. she knew it was a proof
pierre.
suite, and in the smoke that suddenly surrounded the gun they could see
down by them.
the same. in carriage row carriages had been left in the shops, and
quantity of phenomena of which it is cognizant and that always appear
of the town, stretching out and concealing one another, reminded him of
war was the violence done to him; to businessmen that the cause of the
with a distressed face left the room to find sónya.

event was produced by napoleon’s power, another that it was produced by
his rising. “this unfortunate fete at the ambassador’s deprives me
to the table. pressed by the throng against the high backs of the

unhappy her father would be if andrew left without being reconciled to
which she had to reply; the room in which little nicholas had been put
relinquish them.
attack our headquarters, and the commander in chief has to ask for a
having said this she went up to the doctor.
neck. that officer did not take his eyes from dólokhov and again asked
and salt and an icon of saint peter and saint paul, asking permission,

gave an order, and the dragoons formed up in line. the crowd moved
i have done that though badly and to a small extent; but i have done
could carry no weight—“i give you my word of honor that i have five

of it gets made or because people try to exchange it for gold, so also
request that he would take no part in the matter, rostóv agreed to be

weceives evewyone, thank god!... it’s awful with those sausage eaters!
bonaparte meanwhile began taking the glove off his small white hand,
on the faces of all the russians and of the french soldiers and officers
the staff of his division to explain his violence at the commissariat

about sergéy kuzmích that interested prince vasíli just then, and

during the first period of their acquaintance bolkónski felt a
denísov called that part of the hut—and it was then so warm that the
the question arose whether the troops were to be in marching order or
virtuous. she fell in love with nicholas and does not wish to know
“what can have happened? and what can they want with me?” thought he
    chapter vi
intermittently but so consistently that he never once deviated from it.

column, milorádovich’s, the one that was to take the place of
meaning of what was happening but merely wanted to do something himself
was speaking hurriedly, evidently afraid her strength might fail

replied.
this new sorrow brought them still closer to one another. princess mary
but the roll of the drums did not make the looting soldiers run in the
terrible dragon, a lady distinguished not for wealth or rank, but for
wished it so.
pierre blushed, as he always did when it was mentioned, and said

aside the conception of cause, should seek the laws common to all the
“however, you’re sleepy, and it’s time for me to sleep. go back to
andrew, and in a determined, ringing, and unpleasant tone he continued:

anything, but to comply with his mother’s demands he even incurred some
but one thing disconcerted her. “can a man so important and necessary to

drawn from history. it is merely necessary to select some larger or
was saying.
her hand on her beautiful, fully expanded bosom and looking up to
if a soldier, he should be dressed in regulation uniform like the




borís smiled, as if he understood what prince andrew was alluding to
camp at drissa; the second army was retreating, trying to effect a
the princess went up to the door, passed by it with a dignified and
members of the committee were aware of the emperor’s dislike of kutúzov,
the same faces, the same talk, papa holding his cup and blowing in the

between them if pierre followed a line of logical reasoning. when he

in which most people see the chief interest of home politics. denísov,
when pierre and his wife entered the drawing room the countess was in

toward the vanguard. before he came up with the hussars, several
commander in chief would otherwise be dissatisfied. on hearing this the
self-confidence was of no avail in relation to the one question before
design excited him still more.
in front of her leaning on his stick. “if you think something more is
position, it was now necessary to attack in order to cut a way through
the theory that this connection is based on the transference of the
impressed alpátych, but in thinking about his own business he soon
member of the hofkriegsrath mildly and attentively.
pierre the following prophecy concerning napoleon, drawn from the
gave some orders to his men. pétya held his horse by the bridle,
after his death.

disgrace such as that of ulm, or to utter destruction. but to forestall
next, bolts for the doors of the new building were wanted and had to be
that inner, spiritual force, that sincerity, that frankness of soul—that
“your majesty is too kind!” replied de beausset to the invitation to
denísov, now a general on the retired list and much dissatisfied with

battle that has been won.
with carts that it was impossible to get by in a carriage. prince andrew
to suspect.
even-tempered and calm and quite as cheerful as of old. this amazed
he! yes, that man is somehow closely and painfully connected with me,”


stern face, but seeing, that natásha’s head was covered, she smiled

to borodinó (he could not have seen that position because it did not







caesars, alexanders, luthers, or voltaires, and not the histories

become of him if natásha didn’t keep him in hand.... have you any idea
    * (2) “hurrah for the austrians! hurrah for the russians!
audible.
there was none he would so much like to have for a friend as that very
little daughter (long-faced like her father) and her governess. the
    * i love you.

man whose authority would be willingly recognized, and bennigsen is the
his face, nor a single gesture. she caught the unfinished word in its
was relating an anecdote, and speránski was laughing in advance at




sad and depressed. it was all so strange, so unlike what he had hoped.
be stopped and the countess herself would lean out of the window and beg
order she brought them until the count himself, in his wife’s name,
two ladies, he whispered to hélène that he meant to choose countess

could not remember what it was that people say. he looked at her face.
units it takes, we feel that to take any unit disconnected from others,

to express our sincere views on that subject, and can only say to the
the advanced army. prince andrew bolkónski came into the room with the
place of fodder, and sat down to dine round the caldrons from which
cap and smoothing his hair wet with perspiration with his plump hand,
to the views of the old generals kutúzov and prince schwartzenberg, it
he took his seat beside the aide-de-camp on duty and drove into the
disturbed him. “well, what business is it of mine what goes on
had reached braunau at the same time, was in splendid condition. there
magnanimous. she felt convinced of that. thousands of dreams of a future
unnoticed glance at little seven-year-old nicholas, who was sitting in

he did not know arakchéev personally, had never seen him, and all he
always happens, was met by representatives of the other. the members of

right flank too extended,” he went on. “that’s all nonsense, there’s
“according to the scouts the last of them crossed on rafts during the



him several riders with white plumes in their hats. in a moment everyone
“most gracious sovereign and emperor!” prince vasíli sternly declaimed,
to do so. he could not have said by what standard he judged what he


general safety.”
she even turned so that he should see her profile in what she thought
new pair of handsome silk-embroidered braces that, for some reason,
generals i have known were, on the contrary, stupid or absent-minded
moment.

and the buying of expensive seed corn, and did not make a hobby of any
“vive henri quatre! vive ce roi valiant!” sang morel, winking. “ce
when she had taken leave of him and remained alone she suddenly felt
courage, so he drew himself up and looked around him merrily; then it

all—for those who drive one away as well as for those who protect one:
that have induced you to take this melancholy decision.



for five weeks, and then suddenly, with no fresh reason, fled back:

alexander, helped by the advice of stein and others, united europe to
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
again; another, rubbing some dry clay between his palms, polished


demanded.
been told to report.

french, smoke appeared all along their uneven ranks, and musket shots

at drissa, according to pfuel’s plan, but on changing the movements of
“the sovereigns? i do not speak of russia,” said the vicomte, polite
that is, her husband whom she had to keep so that he should belong
on man—a happiness of the soul alone, the happiness of loving. every man
there?” he said, turning to the door as he heard a tread of heavy

in front of a landowner’s house to the left of the road stood carriages,
tomorrow! only let me tell you, i want to know my son-in-law better. you
subject. “i was told they are coming soon. i am also expecting andrew


regiments, both cavalry and infantry, were by no means ready for the
an inexhaustible number of pretty young women, married and unmarried,
other young ladies in begging natásha and nicholas, who were noted for
numerous these detachments became.
the princess.
remarks which seemed to him clever while they formed in his mind became
yes! there they are, those false images that agitated, enraptured,
on the march from vyázma to tsárevo-zaymíshche he rode his light bay

been up to heaven only knows what! and they have had to suffer for it.

filled by the domestic serfs—the men on one side and the women on

that is still too fresh. ah, dear friend, you are happy not to know
    chapter vii
such conditions. you say i have begun this war! but who first joined his
unknown factor—the spirit of an army—is a problem for science.
indications, he saw clearly that the allies believed him to be far away
he uttered a plaintive cry of pain, and that cry was fatal. the barrier
chapter vii
“to please moscow girls nowadays one has to be melancholy. he is very
commander of the left flank of the infantry of the first army, a place,
petersburg people. he was interrupted several times by applause. when

themselves, stifle this remorse and grow callous, as a result of being

match... and sónya...?” and on taking leave of the governor’s wife,
about him. he reddened and turned away.
registrar’s department, “that he should remain to guard his documents.
hussar, the hussar! just like a boy! and the legs!... i can’t look at
danger of being crushed, he rushed at the biscuits. he did not know why,
“i knew,” thought nicholas, “that i should never understand
helplessly on the sofa.
chapter xxii
napoleon into the depths of the country was not the result of any plan,
at the appointed hour the prince, powdered and shaven, entered the
preparing something for them and concealing it.
that same evening there was to be one of the balls that iogel (the
voice, and he began scraping his dirty feet on the threshold.
sad, very sad. but remember, my dear fellow, that i am a father to you,
he worked at formulating the section on personal rights.
“to the left!... keep to the right!” the men shouted to him.
one day he took the countess to a roman catholic church, where she knelt


overcoat, with a big snow-white beard and eyebrows and a ruddy face.
because of me.’ so he confessed and it was all written down and the
understood it.
when the frenchman began to cry.
    * the little one is charming.
about discussing it. besides the ordinary topics of conversation, pierre
involuntarily compared the two: the lack of spirituality in the one and
brother hippolyte told me about your goings on. oh!” and she shook her
they would all have to go begging. the count was so weak, and trusted

pierre. the satisfaction of his hunger and the wine rendered the captain
and being, as a malcontent, much interested in what was occurring in

“seriously, you’d better drop it! you’ll only get yourself into a
“is that you, clément?” he asked. “where the devil...?” but, noticing

“i’d like to put you on a two days’ march with a knapsack! your
in.’ i do not know how far he was justified in saying so.”
recognizes (and can but recognize) as free.
men’s opinions and their lives, and between one man and another, pleased
escape runs straight into his opponent’s arms.
all these dreams melted and merged into the chaos and darkness of
very decent town. you and i will travel comfortably in my calèche.”


emotions associated with that feeling.
he muttered something angrily and went away along the passage.
“why are you here?”
to get married,” he added rather more quickly, as if pleased at having



he passed four days in the coach house near the crimean bridge and
sónya smiled.
produced the chief beauty of the spectacle.
“well, then, go back to the army,” he said, drawing himself up to his
freedom is the thing examined. inevitability is what examines. freedom
the hussar shouted back.
everything, my friends, and i beg you to take everything, all our grain,
action.
who had attacked the russian army in order to drive it from its position
andrew as one of themselves, an honor they did not extend to many. from
whom should i say that? either to a power indefinable, incomprehensible,

“you’ve set your arm bleeding afresh. wait, we must tie it up
“all right. they are good fellows. and how have you wriggled onto the
if the emperor pleases to recognize bonaparte as emperor and to conclude


there.

“i think not,” answered the frenchman, feeling himself over. “but i have
laughed blandly at her naïve diplomacy but listened to what she had
person. it has now come to my knowledge that you lent him your carriage
isn’t it logical?
- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free     distribution of project gutenberg-tm works.
and interests before him! “yes, they have taken a wise decision,” he
the hussars crowded round and responded heartily with loud shouts.
“nothing,” answered the countess. “if everything is ready let us start.”
of fate and the designs of rogues. during the few days he spent in
“my vocation is a different one,” thought princess mary. “my
the minister and his son had arrived, but the appearance of both had
the impression the princess made on rostóv was a very agreeable one. to
thousand austrians, with a hundred thousand russians, were to operate in
the third time the rhetor came back more quickly and asked pierre
aunt’s efforts to dissuade her—and not merely to go herself but to take
having put on french greatcoats and shakos, pétya and dólokhov rode to
another, a thin little officer, was speaking to everyone, conjecturing
the unexpected realization of the fact that he still valued life as
mention, and which you think is the result of your own mental efforts,
i am as devoted to him as before: i know him thoroughly and very highly
“but such a... such a... never happened to me before!” she said.
turned to leave the room, but pierre held her hand.

loneliness of his daughter amid the general conversation. “got herself
were now moving forward.
“i’m not afraid of anything,” said sónya. “may i go at once?”
princess mary sat alone in her room listening to the sounds in the

duc even the most partial ceased to regard him as a hero. if to some
even their faces, more and more distinctly. they were our horse guards,
that she understood, and this seemed to make her love for him still


the wedding berg entered the count’s study early one morning and, with

his mind devised reasons why he should be mentally tranquil too. the
this interview between the two emperors, and having succeeded in this,
to demean his dignity and felt the necessity of replying; but, as a man,
wife’s circle, which did not interest him, that air of unconcern,


smiling, but in spite of herself her eyes under their thick long lashes
passage. he was awaiting pétya’s return in a state of agitation,
another still stronger wave flowed through the crowd and reaching the
white muslin, she returned home after communion, for the first time for
“well, that’s right. as soon as the countess wakes we’ll be off, god
by the beginning of august hélène’s affairs were clearly defined and
to explain frankly to some gentleman-in-waiting (he imagined the emperor
it again when alexander came out. the interview had lasted an hour and
through the closed doors came the sound of difficult passages—twenty
day there, when preparing to go to kiev, he fell ill and was laid up
occurs under certain limits of time, and where it is not one will that


not expecting to come on the enemy down by the stream, and having
of paper money. anatole, with uniform unbuttoned, walked to and fro from
the men and officers returning spoke of a brilliant victory, of the
i have thought and thought again about your affair. you see, if you

rostopchín had replied that he could not come:
habits, passions, and impulses toward goodness, beauty, and truth—that
and the old countess’ grief fell blow after blow on the old count’s
which means the all. talks with brother v. strengthen, refresh, and
and on the threshold appeared the handsome figure of the terrified
and scented myself.”

supposing natásha to be asleep.
history deliberately avoid seeing that this flank march cannot be
him.
was joyfully conscious of a return of that self-sacrificing spirit in


and the pillage of moscow it had borne within itself, as it were, the

“si vous envisagez la question sous ce point de vue,” * he began,
palms, and smelled their pungent, sweetly bitter scent. nothing remained
before his old guards, renounced the throne and went into exile. then
“still the same,” she said to her husband.
positions and maintaining a hellish fire under which the french army was

the angle became still more acute and we withdrew still farther, because
mistress—entered the room inaudibly but hurriedly and with a beaming
reading many historical works cannot help doubting whether this new
crossing and uncrossing his legs and smiling contemptuously to himself.
from davout, who was now called prince d’eckmühl, to turn the russian
in the middle of the summer princess mary received an unexpected letter
and letters which contain hints of such a line of action. but all these
this peasant, it was reported to him that tíkhon had attached himself

absolutely necessary.

entertainment at the gypsies’, with the result that he had no

the rest of his life.

the height of happiness was reached—and so simply, without warning, or
chapter vi
and fighting, not at all as the gunner and the frenchman with frightened
    chapter iv
change the other’s views and without condemning him, but with the quiet,
out a traitor! they slander him as a traitor, and the only result will
most of the guests, uncertain how to regard this sally, looked at the
him her intention of keeping him under her wing, pétya guessed her
horror-struck. but when she saw that pierre’s sacrilegious words
“oh yes, your plan. to join the hussars? i’ll mention it, i’ll bring it
on duty in a discontented voice, “the plans must be examined and several
were present, including dólokhov and denísov.
left moscow—as a child wants the floor on which he has hurt himself to
1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable


greater part of the enemy’s opened out from this battery. just facing
chestnut donéts, and whistling to his own leash of borzois, set off
    * “countess, there is mercy for every sin.”
whole mass of men was concentrated.
silent, waiting for what he would say.
fine young daredevil of an hussar married and settled down. among these


and at the people in it. round a long table covered with black sat some
somebody. kutúzov merely shrugged his shoulders when one after
into a heap of meaningless rubbish. though he did not acknowledge it to

own injustice toward her.

hélène’s imperturbable conviction that it was as simple and natural as
for half an hour repeating the same words to the various arrivals,
sarcastic glance toward the militia officer.
involuntarily noticed that one of them was bleeding, and galloped on.
foundation
frequently addressing one to whom the title was still a novelty.
preparations for it with unparalleled solemnity. this kutúzov who before
wet cloaks, but they did not sleep for a long time; now they exchanged
chapter xvii
lightly, more lightly, and yet more lightly whirled the count, flying

pétya. “vasílich told me. i consider...”
happy look of resignation to the will of god on her face. their box was

from prince shcherbátov’s house the prisoners were led straight down the
“go! go! killed in battle, where the best of russian men and
the calm frost of twenty degrees réaumur, the dazzling sunshine by day,
leaf, gave it to kozlóvski, stepped quickly to the window, and threw

natásha was not in the room.
mamma said she was angling for you. how could she say such a thing! i
something was still stretching out, and the candle with its red halo
infamous, vile woman!”


then believe an expert. i have just been talking to dmítri onúfrich”
to be observed by their companions and searching uneasily for rivals to
speránski went on to say that honor, l’honneur, cannot be upheld by


come in.”

who had just thrown out the drawer of a chest, filled with metal
prejudices, and equality of citizenship, and all these ideas napoleon
rostóv as he continued to deal.
the day after the review, borís, in his best uniform and with his
remembered prince andrew, prayed for him, and asked god to forgive her
    chapter viii

go to him himself, and tell him what ought to be done in a tone of

from the sound by a barefooted girl, and a stout, rosy, good-looking
of the emperor’s house.
and there broke through that cloud. a great number of people crowded in
don’t forget to put out my new coat,” added rostóv, fingering his




“no, now that she has become a bluestocking she has finally renounced
historical leader which serves to express the people’s life, as other
have any ill feeling for me. i beg you to forgive me.”
to the unknown place where he was going, many more of our men were going

paralyzed his will.
“yes, go back,” said márya dmítrievna, “and wait there. if your

“i should like to know, did you love...” pierre did not know how to
and more than forty borzois, so that, with the borzois on the leash
to retire from the army and return and marry sónya, nicholas, serious,

set off. ferapóntov’s whole household came out too, following alpátych
moscow’s last day had come. it was a clear bright autumn day, a sunday.

dear boy,” and he drew pierre’s arm downwards, “it is simply a

heart. “what a foot, my dear fellow! what a glance! a goddess!” he
negotiations.
he patted her on the shoulder and himself closed the door after her.
when they went in. in her snug room, with lamps burning before the icon
anywhere and wandered from room to room like a shadow, idle and
because the ball became livelier after his departure. for one of the
become three times as rich as before.
interested him passionately and exclusively. this was a plan of campaign
any women—countesses or cooks—who were not venal. i have not yet met
“heavens! what a virulent attack!” replied the prince, not in the

words that had struck him in the emperor’s appeal—that the sovereign was
ran forward on each such occasion, fearing to miss a single word of the
promptly all that related to the gist of the business was evaded. he
library cupboards. “don’t catch up against it! it’s heavy, lads—solid


said: ‘what they have brought us to!’ and had a sob in it when he said

perceive its plain and terrible meaning, these causes seem insufficient.
baltic provinces—and i can live in petersburg on my pay, and with
usual. the members who were assembling for dinner were sitting about

wagon.


the crowd of retreating soldiers, ordering them back. bagratión rode up

perished with each additional day it remained in moscow. but it did not
beautiful.”
adjoining room.



during the whole time of his convalescence in orël pierre had
impossible for him to live otherwise than as he did and that he had
could see what i was like without you, how i suffered!”
several soldiers gathered by the wall of the trench, looking out to see
then already it bore within itself the germs of inevitable ruin. how

left and feeling very anxious about his wound and the progress of his

temptations of the devil and princess mary knew it. she knew that the
attaining to the art of integrating them (that is, finding the sum of
power, from the standpoint of experience, is merely the relation that
cry or to laugh. prince andrew shrugged his shoulders and frowned, as
“when, when did the abandonment of moscow become inevitable? when was
but in spite of that she seemed to be disillusioned about everything and
for a moment he dozed, but in that short interval innumerable things
but as soon as one gets to business nothing is ready, and the enemy,
distinguished dignitary and a swiss who had formerly been tutor at the
“they must understand that we can only lose by taking the offensive.
soon after this there came into the dark chamber to fetch pierre, not
“yes, sir.”
while they were talking a maid thrust her head in at the other door of
see paragraph 1.e below.


natásha involuntarily gazed at that neck, those shoulders, and pearls
seven virtues, corresponding to the seven steps of solomon’s temple,
márya dmítrievna liked sundays and knew how to keep them. her whole
then addressed pierre.


spread apart, he began explaining his reasons for thinking the abbé’s
at another time of borrowing money on a note of hand. a few days before
the emperors remounted and rode away. the preobrazhénsk battalion,
the city and there is not the slightest danger. see! i’ve just been

wagons, soldiers, gun carriages, carriages, soldiers, ammunition carts,
air. “a man told me to give you this—” and she handed natásha a
both sides of pierre.
shoes he had suffered just as he did now when he walked with bare feet
on snowy-white smooth pillows, evidently freshly changed, pierre

of history can and should follow a path contrary to that taken by other
“he has weported himself sick, he’s to be stwuck off the list
this redoubt consisted of a knoll, on three sides of which trenches had

would be too extraordinary,” and at the very moment she thought this,
excitement, rushed toward the drawing room door, probably in order to
suddenly thought. “what do i want? to be free, released from sónya...
commanders are: herr general wimpfen, le comte de langeron, le prince de
himself, but she felt that his incomprehensible words had an improper
and next balls, about theatricals, and who would meet whom, and when and
day by day. all the physically or morally weak had long since been left
bank by unseen hands. prince andrew and the officer rode up, looked at
that army could not recover anywhere. since the battle of borodinó
“your emperor’s orders are obeyed in your army, but here,” said davout,

two or three priests who were found in moscow did try to carry out
“they say that the rivals are reconciled, thanks to the angina...” and
the speaker and listened. count ilyá rostóv, in a military uniform of

“i think,” said the prince with a smile, “that if you had been
“ah, my dear fellow, what a battle we have gained! god grant that
“you are tired—try to sleep.”
called his peasant existence. the proverbs, of which his talk was full,

“don’t talk about it, natásha. it wasn’t your fault so why should
relating to the condition of the troops on their arrival, and the
though there was a ford one third of a mile away, were proud that they
an hour later dunyásha came to tell the princess that dron had come, and

“oooh! for christ’s sake let me alone!” cried the wounded man, but
the report which had been circulated that the austrians had been beaten
appeared. he would carry her away and then sa pauvre mère would appear
bogdánich was a brick: he told you you were saying what was not true.
hero himself with his paltry vanity and joy in victory appear,
differently. people accustomed to misunderstand or to forget these

two officials a thrashing, and dislocated the arm of one of them.

“no, monseigneur,” he said, suddenly remembering that davout was a duke.
insoluble and terrible as ever, and pierre hastily picked up a book, and

feeling; sharing with the young folk of the rostóvs’ household a
men who commit these crimes, especially their leader, assure themselves
did novosíltsev get? none. the english have not understood and cannot
sides and the torturing pain in his thigh, stomach, and back distracted

an air of importance that showed that she felt she quite knew what she
now. no one will deny that that cause was, on the one hand, its advance

the artillerymen were still as merry and lively as ever. twice they

pierre too drew near the church where the thing was that evoked these
firmly believed in the possibility of the brotherhood of men united in

“will your majesty allow me to consult the colonel?” said alexander
life that pierre had not the heart to refuse, and sat down with him in

nineteenth, a great, excitedly bustling activity began which lasted till
eyes.
solidity and strength hereditary in his family. a beard and mustache
the matter depended on my personal wishes, the will of his majesty the
out and coming in.
fëdorovna flushed, and drawing her kerchief over her face went laughing
another! again! it has hit....” he stopped and looked at the ranks. “no,
“yes, it’s all very well, but when a man’s feet are frozen how can he
“what are you saying about the militia?” he asked borís.
up to pierre, pale and with shining, radiant eyes.
carts piled high with household utensils, chairs, and cupboards kept
sunbeams. in front, beyond a hollow dale, could be seen the enemy’s

capture them all?

and, having undone her pale-colored plait, was pulling it straight
the captain looked at pierre. he had a habit of stopping short in the
days in advance, the order had certainly already been given for everyone
“mind, walk him up and down well!”
was equally bad. as long as they remained with their own people each
napoleon looked up and down the river, dismounted, and sat down on a log
out in front of the outposts, parading his courage. a bullet fired by
bare feet. the boards of the floor creaked. stepping cautiously from one
smile.
napoleon, berthier’s eyes turned to look at a general with a suite, who
“i should never, never have believed that one could be so happy,” she
and schools and reduced the quitrent the peasants had to pay, had not

the captain returned to the room, limping slightly and whistling a tune.
coward like arakchéev, he was as precise, as cruel, and as unable to
plague does not touch him. the cruelty of murdering prisoners is not
the mason’s arguments; he dreaded not to be able to believe in him.
“kindly return to your posts,” said the staff officer trying to
abused each other for their causeless panic.
and the sergeant, taking one of the men by the shoulders, gave him a
had happened and to which she could find no answer.

of rumyántsev, the french, márya fëdorovna, the tsarévich, and others,

down the room twice. his eyes shone and his mustache twitched as if he
reading them aloud. bagratión bowed his head and listened:
based on the consciousness of freedom.

it is a trial sent from above. what is the trial for, when he is not
defection, ran at a trot, panting to catch up with his company. a cannon
1805, 1807, and 1809—precede the great westward movement; there is the

lóbnoe place, pierre had so definitely made up his mind that he could no
hour to do so, and came out upon the square where the streets of the
understood anything of what went on before her. she only felt herself
of the statutes and these remained in his mind.
long-sustained shouts. afterwards when one of the generals addressed
that evening márya dmítrievna was going to the akhárovs’ and
“in token of obedience, i ask you to undress.”
onto the highroad.
“we don’t expect to get him home! we must ask the doctor.”
infringers of the true power, while a republican and a bonapartist will
command of the infantry went toward his horse with jerky steps, and

own.
all began to run and bustle, and rostóv saw coming up the road behind

“ma chère, there is a time for everything,” said the countess with
“well, they’ve sent you a tidy sum,” said berg, eying the heavy
to her by the hood. “foo! you are cold! now take off your things,
though he heard and saw nothing around him he found his way by instinct

listened to her timid story.
discretion to take measures or not for the defense of bald hills, where
austerlitz to the year 1813. at austerlitz he remained last at the
“oh, papa! how nice you look! charming!” cried natásha, as she
ready so soon?”

a horn, with the signal agreed on in case of a fight.

childlike smile which had not once appeared on his face since he left
men. disregarding napoleon they rushed after the plunder and napoleon
“no, why disturb the old fellow?” said the countess. “besides,
but the guns remained loaded, the loopholes in blockhouses and
trousers—furtively tried to pull them down under his greatcoat so
“well, why don’t you speak? whom have you got there dressed up as a
receding line of candles reflected in the glasses and expecting (from

“in a minute, in a minute,” he said, dipping his pen.
boldly, as was evident from the expression on the faces of the listeners
to one another freely, but another motive was to avoid the danger of
physical consciousness of her nearness. she was sitting in an armchair
french corps, and by way of reporting their intention to kutúzov they
boys!...” but despite their united efforts the wattle hardly moved, and
this strong, brave man, this model son and officer that, judging by this
have to go in and ask the princesses; and from there go on to the
and again all the faces in that crowd bore an identical expression,


lighthearted and happy in these novel surroundings that she only feared

her ball dress. she and all the rostóv family welcomed him as an old
princess mary stayed on the veranda. the day had cleared, it was hot and
bourienne and could not bear to see her, thereby showing how unjust were
luminous eyes fixed on her nurse’s wrinkled face (every line of which

pierre was agitated and undecided. natásha’s unwontedly brilliant eyes,
farther away. among the soldiers in the shops and passages some men were
“where has he gone? where is he now?...”
fixed on two saddles and covered with a horsecloth, a small samovar was

instant.
“do you want anything?”
done. he must respond in kind.”
“and tell me your opinion of barclay de tolly. in moscow they are saying
his imaginary sword, but smiling at the remembrance of that pleasant,
mávra kuzmínichna went to the gate.

was being held by the arms and his horse was being led behind him.
and hid it under his waistcoat.
gowns. the first person rostóv met in the officers’ ward was a thin
        24 guns of the artillery of the guards
diplomatists and monarchs nearly quarreled and were on the point of
behind a liveried footman who cleared the way for them, she heard a
great many officers like him were always coming there and that everybody

inhabitants of moscow. it was long since people had been as gay in
his will; but tell me, michaud, how did you leave the army when it
from raévski’s battery a second time, made his way through a gully to


“in the seventh place, try, by the frequent thought of death,” the

and they will at once perceive a unity and coherence in what happened
out a notebook, hurriedly scribbled something in pencil, tore out the
as an equal.

next day to allow time for the relay horses to be sent on in advance.
this young jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested. all were


have obliged me to give this refusal.”
crowd on the open space, she, in her rich satin cloak with a bright

assistance they need, are critical to reaching project gutenberg-tm’s

days previously. that same evening a house serf who had come from
reluctant to be left alone with his friend, asked them to stay and have
conservatory. there she paused and stood listening to the conversation
silent, and i recollected myself only when it was too late. my god, i
“à vos places!” * suddenly cried a voice.

is it moves me so?”

striking a blow!”
feelings and reason, had to go from west to east to slay their fellows,
namesake, the new count bezúkhov) “and now she’s in love with that
understood differently, yet looking at sónya she agreed with natásha’s
after four days of solitude, ennui, and consciousness of his impotence

but at the moment of trial, without asking what rules others have
was too far off, and for a man going a thousand miles it is absolutely

highness,” and pointing to the grand duke who with his high shoulders

then we are told of the greatness of soul of the marshals, especially

boyars.

face, shook his head, and going up to him silently kissed him on the
was the first against whom he directed his efforts, angrily shouted at
“no, i am not going,” pierre replied hastily, in a surprised tone and as
for borís, julie played most doleful nocturnes on her harp. borís
another and soon the whole battalion ran forward shouting “hurrah!”

forth is equally right with the child who stands under the tree and says

steward, and again began giving orders. a light footstep and the

look, here come her suitors.”
boots and shakos.



still rolling up his sleeve, he went out to the porch.
heard.
duke constantine pávlovich, who commanded the guards. the rostóvs
door and his expression of sleepy indifference suddenly changed to one
“give this to the countess... if you see her.”
reflected on theirs.
“and who may you be?” one of them suddenly asked pierre, evidently
the regimental commander, flushing, ran to his horse, seized the stirrup
contingencies... and foresees the adversary’s intentions.”
whispered, and a shudder ran down her back.
began to set. the baggage carts drew up close together and the men
smile.

are executed.
far. by intrigues, violence, exile, and executions, french society—i
headquarters. for the pávlograd hussars, however, the whole of this
“you see, my dear fellow, i have been thinking about you,”
the small group that assembled before dinner in the lofty old-fashioned
arithmetic, when rising from his chair he would walk away from her,
following rostopchín’s example the others also rose.
and, before the latter had time to draw his sword, knocked him off his
by the arm and put him in the corner. having put him in the corner
were tuned to a high pitch and this was too simple and needlessly
two months had elapsed since the news of the battle of austerlitz and

the epistles and gospels. let us not seek to penetrate what mysteries
rapidly adding up the total of rostóv’s debt, breaking the chalk as
“oh, nonsense, nonsense!” anatole ejaculated and again made a
“but shan’t we have to accept battle?” remarked prince andrew.
a few minutes later the governor received alpátych and hurriedly said to

did not admit anyone. a maid came to the door to say that alpátych was
agent by which nitrogen, oxygen, manure, and plow were made
actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or incidental damages
stood just behind the priest’s back, and without crossing himself (he
lorrain, pursing up his lips, waved a severely negative finger before
“i wished to get a nap, mon cousin, but i can’t.”
pillows one at a time and shaking them.

doings of a few dozen men in a building in the city of paris, calling


of austerlitz: nine tenths of the men in the russian army were then in
foul-mouthed devils, you brutes, i’ll give it to you!” shouted he,
and malevolence with which the old prince received and dismissed the
vasíli to himself, with a sorrowful sigh, one morning, feeling that

and that her husband was a cross laid upon her by god. prince vasíli

wishing to avail himself of their courtesy, and this caused some delay
wiping them on the sleeves of their greatcoats. all their faces were
who kept her waiting some minutes. “don’t you wish to serve me? then
heard that the regiments were to be made up to their full strength, that
hands that are unclean.” while the grand master said these last words
“you are not wounded?” he asked.
paused at the full stop. “i hope you will find him sympathetic and

and when everything had been plundered fled farther.

o god, why isn’t he here?” natásha quieted herself for a moment,
army were like the plan of a market gardener who, when driving out of
against napoleon.
and uvárov’s on the right flank against the french, were actions
crossed.
and colonel looked sternly and significantly at one another like two

each side of the trench, the earth was cut out to a breadth of about two


took her hand and begged her forgiveness, without knowing what for.
“my mother! my mother, my angel, my adored angel mother,” and
feelings in others, and if never having felt them i cannot approve of
pleased to have back a friend whose presence made life run more smoothly
the whole place and the warm air heated by the crowd, natásha little
and she began to recover physically.
and i don’t now.”
but those glances expressed something more: they said that she had

spot the day before, but now the whole place was full of troops and
your battalions. i will keep out of fire if you with your habitual

worth mentioning. but in the secret depths of her soul the question

    * “he is charming; he has no sex.”
chapter xix
lively, and she did not talk to her husband. when they left the table
said repnín.
“well, lëlya?” he asked, turning instantly to his daughter and
irresistibly attractive to pierre.


courage. next he thought that his enemy would send the squadron on a
a life i can’t decide or think properly about anything. one’s head
possess courtly tact, “that his excellency made it an express condition
were using their ramrods, others putting powder on the touchpans or



ordinary language as the lowest depth of baseness which every child

he glanced at prince andrew’s face and quickly turned away.
was next to himself the most important guest. the old people sat with
filling their bags. on seeing alpátych, ferapóntov turned to him:
ever heard him utter a groan or a word of complaint. from morning till



fulfill the demands of politeness, and she firmly resolved to maintain
conservatory and pantry into the large marble dining hall, where tables
good-for-nothing. when kutúzov, conforming to a custom of catherine’s
cavalry and here he noticed a stir and signs of preparation for battle;
“has the enemy entered the city?” he asked.
thoughts were centered on one subject—the irrevocability of death and
when borís and anna pávlovna returned to the others prince hippolyte


moscow? yes, here it lies before me, but why is the deputation from the
generally, and in the cold, repellent glance the emperor gave him, he
all follow that the march was the cause of it.
prepare a circular, memorandum, or report, skillfully, pointedly, and
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost

told stories called it femgálka; karatáev and others called it gray, or
in anything they had been able to get hold of, were standing in the road
had happened the evening before? “yes, yes! all that has happened, and
generally incomprehensible to us, is but a manifestation of his infinite
hurriedly up to the unknown general and blocking his way to the door.
to the fords and the boats. kutúzov himself had driven round by side
especially at the one running toward them.


out by prince andrew without display and without perceptible difficulty.
chapter xv
abandoning their belongings and proving by that negative action all
“no, no, please not... you are mademoiselle bourienne,” said
brightened into a happy, grateful, childlike smile.
easy. and tell me, please—i’ve been meaning to ask—how is he



more profound, more skillful, or more admirable,” and enters into a

another.”
chapter xxxvi

pierre knew so well in his wife, revolted him.
tooth or hair remained.
unconsciously felt that a quite different, firm, french order had been
among them. but those who surrendered, while remaining in the same
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. unless
and she seized the countess’ hands and kissed a knuckle of the little
rostóv passed through the anteroom.
and pierre, anxiously trying to remember whether he had done anything
and most painfully. what would she not have given to bring back even a

listen!” said natásha, with momentary vexation.
dealer’s in myasnítski street. when returning by that street she had
tree of knowledge of good and evil.... ah, well, it’s not for long!” he
now before i am off duty. i’ll take another turn and when i get back

and leaning his head against her he began to cry.
“mon enfant!” she muttered, “je vous aime et vous connais depuis
killed, drops from above slowly and lightly as a feather, among the heap
quite change the whole war and make it less cruel. as it is we have
a smell of perfume, and put it to nesvítski’s nose.
“but don’t be late, count, if i may venture to ask; about ten
when he had gone less than half a mile in the rear of the column he
number one jumped briskly aside. the gun rang out with a deafening
herself recalling to the minutest detail every word, every gesture, and
more and at last the wall fell, and with it the men who had been pushing
eyes, rostóv re-entered that world of home and childhood which had no
battle, and while we were looking for the french—having lost touch with
    chapter iii
your father, or brother, or your betrothed? and he’s a scoundrel, a
won’t begin proceedings, but i advise you to ride over to the staff
borne by the waves from one shore to another as before. they now seemed
free use of his fists. at first he saw nothing reprehensible in

blush.
that day he dined with the marshal, at the same board on the barrels.
march, april, may. speak, mamma, why don’t you say anything? speak!”
at the end of the week the prince reappeared and resumed his former way
came a man wearing a strange shako and a blue cloak, swarthy, sunburned,
pushing back natásha who looked at her with astonished but tearless
had striven only for his people’s welfare, the originator of the liberal
case. the fortifying of the krémlin, for which la mosquée (as napoleon
the marshal had insisted on princess mary’s leaving at once, as it was

a mass because the spirit of the army had so fallen that only the mass
buonapartes. but i warn you, if you don’t tell me that this means war,
“you have seen? you have seen?...” kutúzov shouted. frowning and rising
not only did prince andrew know he would die, but he felt that he was
of the peoples it does not enter anyone’s head today to suppose that
round in turn at the rows of pomaded heads in the stalls and then at
and are keen at guessing their master’s baser impulses, especially those
the sound of cries and blows were heard. on returning to lunch nicholas




beside, and behind him. pierre ran down the slope. “where am i going?”
“dear natalie,” said princess mary, “i want you to know that i am

“i am not your ‘dear sir,’ mr. staff officer, and you did not tell
groom appointed to look after her. pétya, who was laughing, whipped and
that low and simple kind that pierre had once felt for his wife, nor

efforts beyond their strength laboriously drag away a dead bee or
if complaining of kutúzov.
with a shy smile or, politely making way for the soldiers, paced up
was great, but now that he has become a wretched comedian the emperor


strength in life such as he had never before known. and this not only
separated into two packs, that somewhere a wolf was being chased, and
    chapter ii
is the use of that, when a third of their army has melted away on the
from present affairs, but then he suddenly started and his face assumed

the words chance and genius do not denote any really existing thing and
of prince andrew bolkónski, appointed to the command of a regiment of
“you can give the message to his majesty,” said dolgorúkov,

gentleman-in-waiting.
said to herself. little andrew, her eldest boy, imitating his mother,

possible. and i,” continued pierre, “shot dólokhov because i

seventeen of the forty men of the guns’ crews had been disabled, but
ermólov. “it was a trick. it was done on purpose to get konovnítsyn into


unbroken and had all day beaten back an enemy force twice as numerous
having galloped safely through the french, he reached a field behind
from davout’s corps. from the talk of the germans pierre learned that
was in moscow and living in her house—which had not been burned—in
while the borzoi whips, with a cry of “a-tu!” galloped across the


detachment no one knew anything of the general position of affairs. they
will always be noticeable ahead of it. to those on board the ship the

taken him away!”
and that if they would let him have a convoy of a hundred men he would
evident that any answer would lead to conviction. when asked what he
it was nearly three o’clock but no one was yet asleep, when the

the russians did not seek out the best position but, on the contrary,
and kutúzov smiled in a way that seemed to say, “you are quite at
to occur. the superior officers all wanted to distinguish themselves,
breaking off of her engagement to prince andrew (which they explained by
unlike the old one, he expected everything to be unusual, even more
from the infinitely large to the infinitely small. the same is done by
“and how about you, count peter kirílych? if they call up the militia,
waiting to see what he would do. he stood a little while before the

weight.
love.
and he again turned to pierre.
these worlds, but each had its own special reasons to rejoice or grieve
to bear the looks turned upon her, ran away into the dancing hall,
“no, stop!” said anatole. “shut the door; we have first to sit down.
and as soon as the officer let go of the gate handle she turned and,

conspiracy and without soldiers. any guard might arrest him, but by
just returned from vienna, two diplomatists, the old aunt, a young man
acquaintances he had made in moscow formed a current that bore him along
meaningless words that happened to enter his head.
the world, and especially therefore above himself.
all stared in timid bewilderment at the strange, long-haired commander
answer to pierre’s question, and smiled.

she had spoken to hippolyte in the drawing room and which was so plainly
grandfather, wore it in all his wars.” (she still did not take out
happiness. and those thoughts, though now vague and indefinite, again
“i don’t like your mademoiselle bourienne at all,” said prince

dearest to us. he forgot that what he was saying about natásha could
and distinguished from everyone else in the world. napoleon merely laid
“brigand! you shall pay for this,” said the frenchman, letting go
naval uniform, with a dirk, and holding his cap under his arm, he handed

sighing...” thought princess mary.

luxurious drawing room, went to the balcony door, took hold of the

man.”
so universal historians will be valuable only when they can reply to
“ha, ha, ha!” the frenchman emitted a merry, sanguine chuckle, patting

took up her work.

gerásim looked cautiously into the study several times and saw pierre

him in the same direction. on the tenth of june, * coming up with the
passed, the pávlograd division was ordered to advance. in wischau
be seen.
it has gone over. but this one has hit!” and again he started trying
french by wittgenstein, “the hero of petropol” as he was then called in
dumfound people and impel them to insane self-oblivion. he called for
hendríkhovna’s hand, and that the “booby” should go to refill and reheat

the city he was met by count rostopchín’s adjutant.
angrily at him. bondarchúk’s horse swerved and galloped past.
to answer it. “dear princess,” she wrote in french quickly and
teeth on edge!” said a wrinkled clerk who was standing behind pierre,
at anna pávlovna’s on the twenty-sixth of august, the very day of the
ratiocination any farther, when actions are clearly contrary to all
progression; and that crossing of the berëzina about which so much has
the employment of power confer benefactions.
“is there sufficient forage in krems?”
circle from which we must break a way out.”
this life to love her husband, her children, little nicholas, and all

from them; even the soldiers, usually pitiless enough, instead of taking
whispering, not pausing an instant.
hélène had been at erfurt during the famous meeting of the emperors

his wrath, once expended, did not return, and blinking feebly he
herself have been ashamed of so wild a cry and everyone else would have
and now... in this cond...”
absentees, and its peasants were of quite a different character from
entrusted her to belóva. agraféna ivánovna used to come to wake natásha
who because of those tears quite forgave natásha’s joy.
on the eighteenth and nineteenth of november, the army advanced two
obscurity, power and subordination, strength and weakness, health and
chapter xvii
special national histories are like paper money. they can be used and
of his life, but he knew that this feeling which he did not know how to
gone with others to the cathedral, whence they were fetching the
polished shining cannon that quivered on the gun carriages and with
“i am not afraid,” answered sónya’s voice, and along the path
only to the old countess at night in bed could natásha have told all
a peculiarly threatening character to everything, amid this vortex of

so that the maid could hardly get her hair plaited, and she was
fortnight twenty-five thousand, and so on. by the autumn of 1813 the
chapter ii
good and beneficent? their activity would not have existed: there would
hearing how ill he is.”
and comforting thoughts, memories, and imaginings that came to him.


she only repeated that she begged him to forget what she had said, that

extraordinary, superhuman capacities, or simply men of very various
two.
so on evstáfey’s representation pierre had to put off his departure till
everyone in the house, and never forgot anything. if he now incurred

“i have come from the staff, count. have you heard of raévski’s
the ball, in those brightly lighted rooms—with music, flowers, dances,
not only to herself, to be near her brother who was perhaps dying, but
chapter viii
emaciated sallow man on crutches, barefoot and in underclothing, limped
anyone flogged or sent to siberia—and still less for your serfs. if
as with his feet.
that they would speak nothing but russian and that those who made a

particularly those who had lately joined. these according to pierre’s
actions for which they blame him (the holy alliance, the restoration of
but the men in the battery seemed not to notice this, and merry voices
anything to say to the contrary. but no one said anything. “moscow, our

he wrote from the province of vorónezh where he had been sent to procure
every act of theirs, which appears to them an act of their own will, is
attention to the verses.

consciousness that he was not a bad man, and he felt this because he saw
and so without particularly analyzing all the contiguous sections of

after dinner natásha, at prince andrew’s request, went to the
bass voice. “i only came across pelagéya in yúkhnovo....”
that answer to princess mary which she had been unable to write all
paper again. “oh, this german precision!” he muttered, shaking his head.
and somewhat to his satisfaction, that in the depth of her soul she too



lies in renouncing the direct feeling of the independence of one’s own
princess mary listened attentively to what he told her.

commander’s will, owing to the tact bagratión showed, his presence
“and i tell you, rostóv, that you must apologize to the colonel!”

for russian historians, strange and terrible to say, napoleon—that most
“the ways of god are past finding out!” she thought, feeling that the

room, and julie, suddenly abandoning her melancholy, became cheerful and
did not seek battle as eagerly as in former campaigns, but very lazily.
him from all parts of moscow. those about him had never seen the count
responsibility. but circumstances are sometimes too strong for us,
pressing against one another to see him.
blushing—“of asking the commander in chief. he has had a letter from
arm’s length, or holding the head of the ax would cut thin little pegs
always surrounded by the same decks, masts, and rigging of his ship, so
able to inflict punishments justly and unjustly. it is those people i
been written. he took the letter from michael ivánovich’s hand, put it

by the terrible pallor of the princess’ face that looked out at him from
he was in doubt or inwardly at variance, he referred to the views he had
die. and what do you think, dear friend? five years have passed since

within grapeshot range now.”

superfluous was hanging on his benumbed left arm. the wrist felt as if
the conception of a man’s completely free action.
having abandoned the conception of the ancients as to the divine
whatever.
nice... but it won’t do...not that... but as a friend, i shall always
merely unthinkable to fight for ten hours and secure an indecisive
book fifteen: 1812 - 13
everything, annihilating him.
the guitar would have had no meaning for other listeners, but in her

chapter iii
the other dark, shaggy, and sinewy, with a flat nose. the third was

them. still slapping his pockets, he kissed the hand of the countess
asleep, nor even remain in one place, but had to jump up and pace the



superfluity. and now during these last three weeks of the march he had
“we shall want some more wood.”

their memory: “these wretches had occupied the sacred citadel, having
remark to him, pointing to the gallant ápsherons.

he clutched at his head. “who is going to get me the flowers? dmítri!
did not know, but he knew for certain that it was necessary. his income
the chief steward expressed great sympathy with pierre’s intentions,
to approximate, are significant from the fact that after seriously
“if it is true that monsieur denísov has made you a proposal, tell
no difficulties daunted her. thanks to her activity and energy, which
while carts were passing out of the gate. pierre turned away with
greatest efforts of us; and so, led astray by pride, losing sight of
collar which he had arranged so well at home to seem like a man’s.
sometimes several of them merging into one, sometimes one dividing
the better of cleverer ones, hélène—having realized that the main object
persons, among them the elderly lady and anna pávlovna, did however
her wet face against her.
the count burst out laughing. the other guests seeing that shinshín
at ease by him, “but i hope i have not offended you. i always make it
years been suffering from a painful disease of the bladder. no one has
whether he would soon be back.

interests and intrigues as usual. only in the very highest circles were
“ah, here she is!” he exclaimed laughing. “my pet, whose name day
black-eyed three-year-old natásha, her father’s pet, having learned from
fingered his papers, closed the bureau again, and sat down at the table
not bear the idea of letting the enemy even reach smolénsk, still less
be separated from its supplies by the broad river oká, which cannot be
me!” prayed natásha, with impatient emotion in her heart, not crossing
chapter ix
followed by a cossack.
a strategist and the conqueror of napoleon? had he not seen the
infantry to shoot or horsemen to ride down the russian infantry—all
“the berlin cabinet cannot express a feeling of alliance,” began
kutúzov here woke up, coughed heavily, and looked round at the
up and looked out of the window. an enormously long row of carts full of
the will of god, modern history has given us either heroes endowed with
“in a year you will learn to know yourself....”
don’t know me. we have not met for such a long time... not since we
“but he is dying,” pierre again began.
something, isn’t it? but above all, she is a handsome, estimable girl,

at eight o’clock kutúzov rode to pratzen at the head of the fourth

“turn this way!” he shouted, jumping over the ice which creaked
the darkness he took the boy’s hand and pressed it.
borís remembered natásha in a short dress, with dark eyes shining from
humanity, modern history has postulated its own aims—the welfare of the
dear child, consult only your own heart. that is all i have to say,” and

splendid! and i am sitting here ill, as you see.”
i beg you to leave the town and break off all communication with such
of the french came from all sides, and in one village, ten miles from

different men surrounded pierre. he looked at them without understanding
“yes, yes, of course!” pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival of


went by. then suddenly a terrible shriek—it could not be hers, she
a few of them still move, rise, and feebly fly to settle on the enemy’s
his superiors by his promptitude and accuracy and had arranged his money
to do but dwink. if we could only get to fighting soon. hullo, who’s
divisions to attack the convoy.
and indulgently to smooth with it the heart of his neighbor. as to the
denísov’s favorite barcarolle. natásha was preparing to sing.
rose that was slipping on her bodice, settled herself beside him.

but instead of the band a choir began singing a cantata composed by paul
around, as if afraid of everything in that large apartment. awkwardly
partisans. hardly had he got rid of his hat before he ran into prince
intent. in a third place a crowd of bees, crushing one another, attack
battlefield.
firing?” rostóv kept asking as he came up to russian and austrian
and what is justice? the princess never thought of that proud word
before and was less frequently at home.
buttermilk, honey in the comb, still mead and sparkling mead, apples,
called power. this relation consists in the following:


dealer in the town and a landowner fourteen miles out of town who had

gulf of bothnia to the mouths of the danube. catherine the great could


thwee hundwed men to town under escort, instead of staining—i speak
prince kutúzov’s adjutant has brought me a letter in which he demands
uniform an officer, was going at a gallop, crouching on his gray horse
continued abstention from speech, and constant avoidance of everything
with peasants and peasant women, gentlemen’s country houses, fields
would give way not only under a cannon or a crowd, but very soon even
want anything!” he shouted.
shako, carefully loosened the gathers of its lining and drew them tight

“arakchéev and golítsyn,” incautiously remarked pierre, “are now the
“he was a very clever man but has now grown quite feeble, as your honor
the countess was accustomed to this tone as a precursor of news of

feeling respect for our holy order and is too preoccupied and satisfied

had promised bolkónski. he was glad i was free to refuse him.”

up and began watching the movements of our troops below, as plainly
“quand un officier fait sa ronde, les sentinelles ne demandent pas le
man, our dear vyazmítinov....”

in the crowd. the interpreter addressed an old porter and asked if
was lying on the table. ‘here it is! you did not write it yourself but

naming his guests. rostóv looked frowningly at the frenchmen, bowed

own breast, the husband standing by and gazing tenderly at her and the
is grand. but kutúzov—the man who from the beginning to the end of his
point of view.
pay homage to her. napoleon bonaparte was despised by all as long as he
“listen, dear annette,” said the prince, suddenly taking anna
the only conception that can explain the movement of the locomotive is
    * “who excuses himself, accuses himself.”
rain, he repeated: “now then, now then, go on! pelt harder!”
riverbanks and in borodinó. a white church could be seen through the
the party of the old and dissatisfied, who censured the innovations,
louisa ivánovna (madame schoss) would go with them, the young ladies
“mind, the count knows nothing. behave as if you know nothing either,”
suddenly flared up again brightly, lighting up with strange distinctness

most strongly expressed his insincere love for her, and he felt the
“well, what about my plan? peter kirílych, for heaven’s sake! you are my
not giving dunyásha time to finish what she was saying, and trying to
praised. “we have had an explanation today.”
general approval were founded with which, despite court influences, the
“how am i? if we grumble at sickness, god won’t grant us death,” replied
introduce partners to her.
singing some incoherent song, and approached the officers.
the french had been repulsed for the last time. and again and again in
he meant to do, and abandoning herself to him followed his lead hardly
be that afterwards, ashamed of their false accusations, they will make

be thus boldly, provocatively happy.” “and what nonsense all this is
“oh, the nasty beasts!” said he with disgust.

in his large elongated hand on blue paper as follows:
that at dinner he gave orders that mademoiselle bourienne should be
the soldier said no more and the talk went on.
the cause of the destruction of the french army in 1812 is clear to us
not leave his face.
the bald head. véra, natásha, sónya, and pétya now entered the room,
and suddenly two old women began spinning round on the carpet? was that
and wrote a few words on a large sheet of paper folded in four).
for war cannot be conducted successfully without unity of command, and
the servant handed him a book which pierre took to be a devotional work,

gallop and as if by agreement all said the same thing. they all asked
sad voice, as if saying: “very well, finish me off.”
the count, dying with laughter.
cover with their living verdure the grief that weighed her down that
    chapter xix
orderlies. much of it true. but when napoleon asked him whether the
chance. i see a force producing effects beyond the scope of ordinary

officers,” continued the staff captain, “and bogdánich” (the
dressed, at a round table in the clean quarters allotted to them,
olmütz and that he wanted to see him as he had a letter and money for
fought there. this was shown first by the fact that there were no
him:
“i thank you all!” he said, addressing the soldiers and then again the

possible, forget the misfortunes you have suffered, should entertain

beautiful, thoughtful eyes, then his uplifted, rosy upper lip trembled
chapter v
because he ordered it; strange as these suppositions appear, yet human
naughty...”
stood frowning and rubbing his face with his hand.

of how he had saved the life of a pole (in general, the saving of
flank,” he said to himself, “the kiev grenadiers and the podólsk
he could from a frenchman into the wood. besides, to tell everything as
pleasant and comforting. pierre did not understand what his benefactor


inevitability, to destroy the conception of the soul, of good and evil,
how many battalions, and how many prisoners. asking about the russian
to me?...”

“good-by, my dear,” said she to the countess who saw her to the
semënovsk—his adjutant came back from him and told kutúzov that the duke

oldenburg wronged. we cannot grasp what connection such circumstances
“reinforcements?” said napoleon in a tone of stern surprise, looking at
religion.
an action committed a second ago i must still recognize it as not
were to be severe with her and to forbid it ... goodness knows what they

him, and her look asked only one thing: was he a friend, or like the
particular about it.
“you are going?” asked natásha. “i knew you would! sónya said


possibility of active brotherly love among men, which joseph alexéevich

the french attributed the fire of moscow au patriotisme féroce de
    chapter vi
“is he really to be my husband, this stranger who is so kind—yes,
ourselves, were growing up and dying with no idea of god and truth
the sun had set long since. bright stars shone out here and there in the
tíkhon did not like riding, and always went on foot, never lagging

“but if i want to...” said natásha.
became disorganized, many were drowned and many surrendered, but those
their assistance. the majority struggled back to the bank from which
miles away from the french. at grunth also some apprehension and alarm
began to fall. prince andrew turned away and began pacing the room.

“well now, gentlemen,” said bilíbin, “bolkónski is my guest in
or occasioned the migrations can no longer be regarded as the cause.
sound of footsteps.

during his stay at bald hills all the family dined together, but they

kashmir—that’s settled. vive l’empereur! hurrah! hurrah! hurrah! the

will act as they did. i will do better. everyone shall know me, love me,
but the happy day came, and on that memorable sunday, when, dressed in

    * “to shed (or not to shed) the blood of his peoples.”
everything that took place and was reported to him was exactly what he

to recognize his genius as the only explanation of the war carried on
chapter xii
the officer she unfolded the kerchief and took out of it a white


significance of his actions which were too contrary to goodness and
study, the old prince went for his walk as usual next morning, but he
red campfires were growing paler and dying down. high up in the light

      a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   k
particularly on the word possible... “as po-o-ossible,” he ended,


farther, probably along the line of the french camp. rostóv no longer
certainly is communicated very surely, and flows rapidly, imperceptibly,
yet a young woman. escaping from her father she ran to hide her flushed
     * (2) “for heaven’s sake.”


habit, and pierre answered the countess’ questions as to whether prince
purged of their presence.”
effective and pleasant though now feeble voice a story pierre knew. it
“how can one talk or think of such trifles?” thought pierre.
prince andrew repeatedly glanced at natásha, gay and laughing among the
the retreat but of losing in that retreat all i held dear—not to mention
pistols, and at the word thwee begin to advance.
“take this road, your honor, that way you will be killed at once!” a
of good-humored complacency and gaiety. though the performance was
and after a short pause added: “yes, it’s scythian warfare. it’s all
pierre’s interest.
“well then, go, go, go...” said rostóv, and refusing supper and
“i’m glad, glad, to see you,” he said, looking attentively into
that i am saying!” thought a diplomatist, glancing at the happy faces
last interview with the gentleman-ranker—“that private dólokhov,
understood himself. princess mary well knew this mood of quiet absorbed
no longer, as it should be, to avoid or attack the enemy, but solely to
“a trifle,” said the colonel in his bass voice: “two hussars

the town at the dorogomílov bridge saw ahead of them masses of soldiers
return from erfurt. hélène spoke of him as “mon page” and treated
a madman’s cunning, makár alexéevich eyed the frenchman, raised his
meanwhile downstairs in young nicholas bolkónski’s bedroom a little lamp
possibility of, and passionately desired, the regeneration of the sinful
unrestrained irritability to which spoiled people are so prone.
happen to me? nothing! i have done nothing, i didn’t lead him on
he was admitted to the emperor, and an hour later he rode off with



even if you give notice of the possibility of such damage.
without giving them a glance, turned to balashëv:

“so you want to smell gunpowder?” he said to pierre. “yes, it’s a

himself?
captured by the french because the enemy could not surmise that anyone
of ecclesiastical, patriotic eloquence. prince vasíli himself, famed for

prince andrew.
make out distinctly what was in that tent. the pitiful groans from all
expecting that he would have a chance to give a reliable account, which
rostóv did not speak.
eh?... what then?... eh?”
side. though the condition and numbers of the french army were unknown
feeling the hand of god upon him, suddenly recognizes the insignificance
historians’ language.
east to west.
“natalie?” he whispered inquiringly while she felt her hands being

seized all the private carts in moscow and on one hundred and thirty-six
said he.
going to the battle (she knew he enjoyed the thought of the impending
squatting on his heels in front of a clerk. the clerk, with cuffs turned
the salons is unchanging. since the year 1805 we had made peace and had
pyramids,” of the sacrifices he offered for the fatherland, or of
“please come in here. the masters are going away and the whole house
dropping his head he sat down on the cold ground by the wheel of the
“it seems that there will be no need to bring mary out, suitors are
the “man of great merit,” who was still a novice in court circles,
pierre went with rapid steps to the door and suddenly came face to
“sónya, you’ve read that letter?” she demanded.

that never does any harm,” thought anatole.
“how is that?...” began prince andrew, who had for long been waiting
field of austerlitz. not only does a good army commander not need any
a louder tone and more hurriedly than before. during the speech that
staff...”
he looked at her without moving and saw that she wanted to draw a
it was already six in the morning and he still paced up and down the

in her male attire she seemed quite a different person. louisa ivánovna
and, having spent the day with him, returned to barclay and condemned,
gap left by the collar, through which matrëna’s brilliant smile was
activity in which no one could be justified or guilty—a realm of beauty
behind them along the narrow, sodden, cutup forest road came hussars in
and sighs and the sound men made as they crossed themselves were heard.



embarrassing. so he was silent. but before he had decided what to do,
it seemed as if from some words borís had spoken that evening about the
the emperor about him; so that in the case of his death—and he is
a word to the questions addressed to him. but on entering moscow he

in a certain position the day before, by the third day when something
nice indeed, quite french,” and he kissed the tips of his fingers.
pierre, and he gazed with his eyes fixed on the red reflection of the
as a force that itself produces events. yet in most cases universal

leather breeches tightly fitting the fat thighs of his short legs, and
look for her.
sad, but it was a sweet, tender sadness.
club were also sons of the fatherland ready to sacrifice everything
had no idea how long he had been there. in the middle of the night three
“but i can’t believe it,” insisted sónya. “i don’t
chapter xv
the portionless sónya. though she blamed herself for it, she could
instructions that he was retiring that night. we cannot fight in this
and see the standard flapping against its staff.
for the good we have done them.’ father took her when she was homeless
and tears.
his volition. but his will—which forms the essence of his life—man
individuals who appear to us to have established that mode of government
understood him. why didn’t i enter the room?” she thought. “perhaps he
drooping in spirit and closing their eyes before the menacing cloud of

“karatáev!” came to pierre’s mind.
znaim.
happiness with him she had so often repeated in her imagination, and
the trees there, came upon prince andrew. on seeing the young master,
reign would have begun.
eyes. he really was in love with the tsar and the glory of the russian

electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
the candlestick of which the cockroaches that had been gnawing it were
“more-orderers” had really been at their village, but that tíkhon

public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing
him with pleasant smiles when he talked to the old prince.
rode, not hoping to find anyone but merely to ease his conscience. when
“you are perfectly at liberty to treat me with respect or not,”


chapter vi
and at the grand balls was divided into several circles, each with its
and enthusiastic appearance that made her glad.

and denísov told the esaul that the dispatch just delivered was a


spoil her, but really that seems the best plan. with her elder sister i
frenchmen begin to drown one another cannot be understood without an
what a heart!”
firing at augesd.
and the rider beyond all price! yes, one would have to search far to




gave her the answer in her own heart. “desire nothing for thyself,
she might to hide it, and perturbed as she evidently was each time her
flayed, some not, and broken-down carts beside which solitary soldiers
rostopchín now knew it.
rush to obey the summons. “send dmítri to me!”
it. princess mary had sought the meaning of his words in the mood in
waiting—prepare for the war. all the efforts of those who surrounded the

pierre more strongly with the solemnity and importance of the moment

the visitor, compelled to look on at this family scene, thought it
his grandfather called him) smiled at pierre and let himself be taken


sole aim was the children’s moral welfare delighted him. had nicholas
kind, and though in his lucid moments he knew it was untrue, he was
he might... not only might but should, have gone up to the sovereign. it
he thought, expecting every moment to meet the monarch, and conscious of
in fact, however, though now much farther off than before, the rostóvs

wounds, the loss of family—i fear nothing. and precious and dear
excellent dinners for the officers at every halting place. the regiments
showed how he presented himself, with his hand to his cap, and really
large guerrilla detachment. from the time he received his commission,
like my wife—with them you are within your rights, for they know what

his face again resumed its former stiff and cold expression. but the
nicholas came in serious and taciturn. princess mary seemed even quieter
her country house on the stone island, the charming monsieur de jobert,

and suddenly pétya heard an harmonious orchestra playing some unknown,
on being relieved from picket duty rostóv had managed to get a few

    chapter xvi
a suppressed smile of the joy of life, now when he first entered and

and this courtier, as he is described to us, who lies to arakchéev
“well, then, old chap, mon très honorable alphonse kárlovich,”
neighbor, but they do not give a ruble each to the collections for the
must remain hidden from thee, but live so that thou mayest be ready for
to hers. a woman came from the bedroom with a frightened face and became
however, it was not, and could not be, possible to explain the burning
criminal and at the same time pacify the mob.
retreat during the finest period of summer and with sufficient supplies
cannon and the crowd were dragging it out. a cannon ball killed someone
angry. it made him angry just because the idea of marrying the gentle
pouch, inside the bosom of his dressing gown and held the stem of his
black eyebrows and the extraordinarily soft, bright color of her long,
dissipations of town life, in wine, in heroic feats of self-sacrifice,

related to her meeting with rostóv.
“well, he’s really a good fellow, one can serve under him,” said
shown to the best room, which dólokhov had taken for that evening. some

chapter viii
modesty, and only desired and insisted that their adored sovereign
pity for me. why is it?”
he had not thought about it until that moment. the officers’ laughter
especially the youngest, the pretty one with the mole, who often made
and quill pens his hands came upon on his uncle’s table.

all right my staying a day with you?” and not waiting for a reply he
than the frightened and bewildered mítenka. the conversation and the

anatole was sincerely fond of dólokhov for his cleverness and


emotion of a man re-experiencing in recollection strong impressions he
pétya was in the porch, engaged in giving out weapons to the servants
“i have the pleasure of being already acquainted, if the countess

door. “papa wants to sleep.”
to show from behind the lime trees, a fresh white dewy mist began to
any explanations you can give me.”
dron was one of those physically and mentally vigorous peasants who grow

just entering. the newcomer wore a blue swallow-tail coat with a
devise for him is a celebration of jena and auerstädt. not only is he
pierre sat down with his little partner. natásha was perfectly happy;
that the conditions are unknown and indefinite, and that the appearance
hearers—who like himself had often heard stories of attacks and had
forgot everything. but in time he grew used to this demand. knowing that
natásha blushed scarlet when she heard this.
intimate places of her heart, and, mistrustfully at first but afterwards
in which it has not been possible to retain many troops; for with the
remembered that, two days before, that man had burned his shirt while
napoleon grinned maliciously and again raised his snuffbox to his nose.
attracted rostóv’s attention. this man was speaking to someone in the
almost time,” she added, giving pierre to understand that they were
anatole sat at a table frowning and biting his lips.
with this order, for there were two hundred and thirty households at
he had not decided what it should mean when he heard the voice of the
“be so good as to step in. makár alexéevich, the brother of my late
in the hair, the hair combed up, and the blue scarf arranged lower on
alexander did not receive these envoys and did not reply to their
go to see his highness.
only be negative, but had said it with a shade of bitterness and irony
breast.”
“lower its head, lower it!” he said to a soldier who had accidentally
to my rudeness while i on the contrary nourish contempt for him. o god,
only telling you what it is. napoleon has also formed his plan by now,

his servant handed him a half-cut novel, in the form of letters, by
the balance of power in europe, the diffusion of the ideas of the

she could not have read the letter as she did not even know it had

“in the first place, truníla is not a ‘dog,’ but a harrier,”
arm against the disturber of its peace. all napoleon’s allies suddenly
the old prince’s for news of him.
gold, of carts and horses, kept rising, but the value of paper money and
our most gracious sovereign lord, the emperor alexander pávlovich; be

on every face and only kutúzov’s angry grunts and occasional cough
borís did not finish, for at that moment kaysárov, kutúzov’s adjutant,
a confirmation of his thoughts, and after a few minutes’ reflection
everyone, the tutors and governesses made their bows, and they went out.

majesty.”
to unload the muskets, explode the ammunition, and all return home as

confusing their minds by dwelling on mystical books that merely awaken

tomorrow... in the evening. you must come.... come!”
a weak state as you know,” said the old servant.
natásha was listening and considering.
the rostóvs lived in the same hospitable way in petersburg as in
story), and how rostopchín let him go and assured the people that he was
the carpets yielded and the lid closed; natásha, clapping her hands,
army.
to business in front of a map, where he would feel at home. he nodded
in military affairs the strength of an army is the product of its mass

at the entrance to the arbát square an immense expanse of dark starry
minute and must go back—but you wrap the fur cloak round her first thing
or prince vasíli. forty thousand serfs and millions of rubles! i know
dangerous business, and if you think about it—a stupid business. well,
or carve spoons. in denísov’s party he held a peculiar and exceptional
the door of the shed.
capitals, he still continued to live in the country, remarking that
promptings of the throng.

“i think not,” he said, “and yet—yes. she does not deign to be


to the factor does not yield results which accord with the historic
“yes, a regular volcano,” said the count. “takes after me! and
had already begun to disconcert him. now this world disconcerted him no
“now softly, softly die away!” and the sounds obeyed him. “now fuller,

ought to be, and the more amazed at my genius.”
her.
one desperate, frightened yell from the first french soldier who saw the
but this one wouldn’t hurt a fly. she has asked me to bring you two
and occasionally in french. in that drawing room were gathered, by

gray stallion that had not been ridden for a long time, and when
but these did not impress him. what struck him most was the sight of a
waist in the water joyfully wriggling his muscular figure and snorted

of this unknown factor and tries to discover it—now in a geometric

the regiment, and how satisfied his father was with him. berg evidently

try to display any of these—but because of something else. he despised

punished? but even if we admitted that kutúzov, chichagóv, and others

grow imperceptibly from the cradle to manhood, did not exist for the

youth upwards has been occupied with learning: that is, with books and
the prince stopped. he saw the effect these words had produced on his
and what to expect after it beyond the grave! how happy and calm i
by the clouds, over the roofs of the street opposite, on the
does it! we never hear a word but dólokhov is mentioned. they swear

some thought and hastened to utter it. the old magnates, whom pierre
not admit of the possibility of abandoning moscow, and the commander in
he would make the countess his mother happy, would be able to put his
army at vílna. those about him said that he became extraordinarily slack
night.”
case of any commander in chief) to prevent an attack.
ex-captain of police, was saying angrily:
“it goes smoothly, too. well, now, zaletáev!”
not understand). the more we try to explain such events in history
his excitement. “don’t you understand that either we are officers
night i looked at the campfires and there was no end of them. a regular

the peasant, moving away.
activity of men and their historical movements, just as such a
“they’ll put it out, no fear!”
“dunyásha, send alpátych, or drónushka, or somebody to me!” she said,
remained, and this not by any fault of his own. he felt that it was not
to have been complete, and some even spoke of napoleon’s having been

usual, in their spare time, they lit bonfires, steamed themselves before
before him. the french had advanced nearest on our right. below the
“yes, immediately, immediately! hey, who’s there?” he called out

evil intent though he might have refrained from coming in. then who was
the landowner to whom nicholas went was a bachelor, an old cavalryman, a
the council of war began to assemble at two in the afternoon in the
having by a great effort got away to the left from that flood of men,
cossacks, while others ran down the hill toward the pond. pétya was
going along the corridor, the assistant led rostóv to the officers’
of frieze, blue trousers, and large torn hessian boots. the little
force, and so on, but we are conscious of the force of life in man and
manner and with an obvious effort to remember.
utter a sound. he feebly moved his leg and uttered a weak, sickly groan
“what’s the matter with her?” thought pierre, glancing at her.
smiling happily.
leaders serves as an expression of the people’s will or only some part
personal spite against each of the prisoners, in unexpected contrast to

shouted and talked at the same time, so that count rostóv had not time
physical privation and strain he had suffered as prisoner until after
fence they all spread out evenly and quietly, without noise or talk,
    chapter xxv
read and which acts so irresistibly on a russian heart.

had always seen at a distance, but the timid, feeble face she had seen
as if guessing what it was about.
had conquered, settled down in an armchair, inviting prince vasíli to
pierre thought he had never eaten anything that tasted better.
restrain her mother from unreasoning despair. for three weeks natásha
answer. at last he moved up to pierre and, taking the kerchief that lay

belonging to members of the family, there were about a hundred and
of a girl, but i like her.”
as i remember nikólenka. him—i just shut my eyes and remember,
glance at the esaul and denísov one saw that the latter was wet and
snuffbox. nastásya ivánovna dismounted to pick it up. the count and
it’s not all the same to us! am i not right, denísov? it’s not the
tea and evidently needed a pretext for being angry after her meal. “what
nothing, but that. but even it does not exist, there is nothing but
“oh, what sleep—?” said the countess, waking up just as she was dropping
full and with the horses harnessed, stood at the front door. one by one
there is so much happiness; but here... groans, suffering, fear, and
but tried to guess what he was saying and inquiringly repeated the words
in this way toward an understanding of the laws of history; but it is

rostóv took the letter and, throwing the money on the sofa, put both
pierre who had been regarded with patronizing condescension when he was
action he did not understand but which was working well.

“god is merciful....”
“you have earned the st. george’s standards and will be worthy of
intonation, look, and expression, pricked up her ears from the beginning
kutúzov, but the latter moved his hand angrily and kaysárov understood
“i am asking you when you last heard from bolkónski,” repeated
pávlovna again touched pierre’s sleeve, saying: “i hope you won’t
that lay on the bank. at a mute sign from him, a telescope was handed
bad humor, it seemed to him that everyone regarded him with aversion

the boyars had already taken definite shape in his imagination. that



decreases....”
presents itself in the form of an aimless and senseless expedition
prince andrew involuntarily watched as one does watch the hands of
he had pierre at hand in moscow and procured for him an appointment as
which he gave the order only because he thought it was expected of him,
pierre, with a gentle smile of pity and remorse, his arms and legs
were mentioned of how the private physician of the queen of spain had
and at once went to meet the major.

the crowned heads of europe. the discredited rulers of the world can

the same breeding and traditions, bolkónski would soon have discovered
“when will her mother come? she has worried me to death! now mind, don’t
after a short deliberation they agreed to advise his appointment as
with me and we’ll arrange a game of cards. of course you know dmítri
half-contemptuous smile on his lips, scarcely touching the peak of his

raised. the allies defeated napoleon, entered paris, forced napoleon to

the historians of culture are quite consistent in regard to their


must have pity on a young man in misfortune. you know he has important
solution of the whole problem.
himself. “when i was a chit of an officer no one would have dared to
as if astonished at the word. “well, you see, i’m building. i mean

servants.
with the emperor that day.
talk, but i don’t want to,” he seemed to say. besides this, in his

natásha looked at sónya with wide-open eyes as if she could not grasp
without any command being given, apparently obstructed by something in
on the way home, prince andrew could not refrain from asking kutúzov,
on both sides. behind our position was a steep and deep dip, making it
possible sign a receipt for such and such stores received. if not, as
by those troops that they were themselves in the front line and had
them. márya dmítrievna talked to the count about something which they
on the soft springs of the carriage, he turned to prince andrew.
with cold glassy eyes that boded no good, they became silent. on the
“and is there a large force of you here?” said another, a short man,
now the same happy smile as then when he had looked into her eyes. “i

mountains, defending himself against superior forces of the enemy and
and had rooms for the house serfs and apartments for visitors. whole

pétya.
“ah, countess,” he said at last, “that’s a european talent, she
glittering eyes rapturously turned toward her, and especially his neck,
the hounds were joined into one pack, and “uncle” and nicholas rode


what follows from the fact that it is cold; and not that a child who
so to me? what have i done to you? you are going to the war and have no
leather cushion and seeing nothing but that cushion, and her confused
quickly turned away, a scarcely perceptible smile flitting over his
plump, well-nourished body. the fourth was a peasant, a very handsome
visitors, nicholas knew he would have to exchange his tartar tunic for
believes, in the speaker’s tone of conviction and earnestness, or
‘we don’t love people so much for the good they have done us, as
to the ranks,” said the captain softly.
to weep. now it happened that in the group was the very man who had

of marriage, but there were not many such and they remained silent,

left to do as a russian. nothing remained for the representative of the
only betrayed us three times in three years. we take up their cause, but
away to god, while cruel, useless, harmful persons, or such as are a
himself into a chair, gazing at those in the room as if asking, “why
márina and drowned some eighteen thousand in one day.”
continued the vicomte. “i pity the poor husband, that little officer
“well, then, you know,” nicholas went on, growing hot at the mere
a battlefield to whom thousands of new and brilliant ideas occur which
feel the distance that ought to separate them at that moment. natásha

“and didn’t hippolyte tell you?” asked prince vasíli, turning to

going into a tiny recess behind a partition to change, but found it
the contradictory replies, not meeting the questions, which all the

the entire household was governed according to pierre’s supposed orders,
had a double meaning.
poor resources i have for entertaining a woman used to the best society.
konovnítsyn had brought him.

do what was impossible.
there’s a gentleman for you!”
inquisitively and alertly scrutinizing the people driving or walking
sitting in a conspicuous place and talking to him like a grown-up lady.
and then to call him out, reckoning on fédya not fighting because he
encounter an enemy invisible ten paces off. but the columns advanced

provincials, and the very people they had entertained in moscow without

insisted on having the pieces returned that were left over and asked
the revolving pulleys whirr with the rapidity of their movement, but a

in a carved and painted lantern and the intricate, skillful, artistic
rich and deserted city resulted in fires and looting and the destruction
mary’s letter.
the first troops started at once, and during the night they marched
she spoke, mingling most trifling details with the intimate secrets of

“ah, those are the french! and over there?...” pierre pointed to a knoll
and certainly not her; and this is why: first, i know that though he
mischievous, with a voice that was already breaking. as for natásha,
prostrated himself before the gates of the temple. and really, the


paying off the debts and undertaking new activities with serf labor,
premeditation prince vasíli took the first opportunity to gain his
his mustache. “will you now be so good as to tell me with whom i have
out his flat feet with outturned toes in their bast shoes. “i took him
with the smell of honey. there are no longer sentinels sounding the

 and     8 guns of friant’s and dessaix’s divisions
projections, and slipping between the legs of the generals she darted

acknowledge the genius of the russian commanders when they speak of
historic characters and perceive the cause of the effect they produce
“told whom?”
emperor napoleon if we take this bridge, so let us three go and take
general pernetti, with thirty cannon of campan’s division and all the


convincing.
acquaintance.’ in a word, those gentlemen, gascons indeed, so
it’s too late now when vienna is occupied by the french army!”
to me? i love him alone, him, him, with that face and those eyes, with
“bonaparte...” began dólokhov, but the frenchman interrupted him.
guns, that had not ceased for ten hours, wearied the ear and gave

thousand men is moving on dmítrov. a third has advanced along the
at all. nobody will know and i shall never see him again,” she told
mounting his horse again prince andrew lingered with the battery,
pale and agitated, natásha ran into the drawing room.





he half rose, meaning to go round, but the aunt handed him the snuffbox,
reply to which all the rest will be incomprehensible—is: what is the

while pierre was repeating what he had been told about the army leaving
soldiers stopped him.

to be fed and the sheep to be safe...” or: “they cannot understand
“where are they off to now?” thought rostóv.
progression could be determined mathematically. the french army melted
the countess was to wear a claret-colored velvet dress, and the two
sónya among a minority of women who crowded near the wall, not having
a short pause, “but everyone lives in his own way. you lived for
pierre turned back, giving a spring now and then to keep up with her.
nothing of her and looks only at bourienne. no, she has no pride... but
“dmítri,” said rostóv to his valet on the box, “those lights are
during the first half of the journey—from kremenchúg to kiev—all
hear and understand my benefactor’s words.” again he covered himself up
 in all 62 guns.
her hair.
chapter xii
white head twitched with the effort. at last he rose, kissed the icon as
the third order was: general campan will move through the wood to seize
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
prince andrew smiled ironically.
also talking in low tones and wearing ball dresses. the mirrors on the
a few minutes later the chief forces of the french army moved rapidly

the same happy, rapturous faces turned to the shaggy figure of denísov.
began has a war been fought under such conditions as those that obtained

denísov was out of sorts both because of the rain and also from hunger
anatole returned and looked at dólokhov, trying to give him his

pfuel, always inclined to be irritably sarcastic, was particularly
and shouted rudely at the russian general, asking: was he deaf that

“you mean the left flank?” asked kaysárov.
him he would give them an answer that they would not easily forget.
he descended the knoll and began walking up and down before it.
prince andrew’s relations with natásha might, if he recovered, be
called her nephew—and playing with him.
beside dólokhov, nudging with his elbow in a friendly and offhand way
the broken sealing wax and pens.
possible.
occurred.
unworthiness, and in thy great goodness and thy many mercies regard not

skittles,” said he in conclusion.
sent by wounded officers came to the rostóvs’ and wounded men dragged

“there’s nothing to be gay about,” answered bolkónski.
about your mother? it would kill her, that’s one thing. and what sort of
husband’s, dressing gowns and uniforms, which they had put on.
the young fellow on the box jumped down to hold the horses and anatole
“not killed—wounded!” another officer corrected him.
wife, how she would love him become quite different, and how all he had
behavior to women anatole had a manner which particularly inspires in
cases only one goes wrong, but it is her fancy and mine. they have been
have, my dear! i tasted it. the thousand rubles i paid for tarás were
to console pierre for these losses the head steward gave him an estimate

right sounded oftener and nearer. as soon as túshin with his guns,

borís promised to fulfill her wish and was about to begin a
“well,” he went on with an evident effort at self-control and coherence.
a freshly roasted chicken, ham, preserves made with honey, and preserves
noticed), twenty thousand were inevitably doomed to wounds and death
remarks he rose. “if you’ll allow me to leave my natásha in your
worried too about her nephew’s education for which she had always felt

from the old countess. nicholas felt himself irredeemably indebted
man... simplicity is submission to god. suffering is necessary... the
never bear malice or enmity toward thy brother. be kindly and courteous.


a state, live like brothers, render mutual aid and protection one to
anatole glanced at him and immediately thrust his hand into his pocket


another, like bubbles rising in water.
laughing.
had been happiest together, they suddenly had a feeling of estrangement
where they were now being taken and how far they would get that day. an
only the vicissitudes of life can show us its vanity and develop our
orgies and made him drink and dance at the gypsies’, and more than one
without wars. how is it that we women don’t want anything of the kind,
lackeys who care nothing for their master’s business. quarante mille
confidentially.
with his handkerchief, sat down by natásha and did not leave her for

overcoats, the same sounds of firing which, though distant now, still
back at the place where the shot had been fired and the dog was howling,
the french. at the beginning of the battle they stood blocking the

“oh, i’ll go across and have a look....”
birches that formed the forest, it was ten times as thick and twice as
drink shop or fall ill. just as i could not stand his terrible physical
of an immense fortune. the will has not yet been opened. i know you
had entered. the most solemn mystery in the world continued its course.
prince hippolyte was lolling in a lounge chair with his legs over its
told him what he had seen.
sleeves with her usual threatening gesture and glancing sternly round,
months.
the copse across which our men, regardless of orders, were running and
brother rhetor, and awaited his further commands.
“drónushka,” she said, regarding as a sure friend this drónushka who

know it is all over, and forever.”

a complex and difficult process of internal development was taking place
“what about the left flank?” asked pierre
punishment suddenly changed.

from behind.
farther from him than another; there were none of those uncertain and
borís felt that henceforth his position was fully assured. he had not
the whole,” said pierre, and he pointed to the sky.
all her clothes in petersburg and that heaven knew what she would have
they were false) paid to him in advance for hay.
been so much in the grip of inevitable laws, which compelled him, while
come intentionally to speak of his love and therefore meant to be
his instinct urged him on. before the officer finished his sentence
called culture—in mental activity.
“trakh-ta-ta-takh!” came the frequent crackle of musketry, but it was
“i suppose it has to be like this!” she thought. she kept looking
faces, that feeling was intensified. throughout his journey he felt like
it necessary to hold his head higher, to brace himself, and to question
it was evident that this strange, strong man was under the irresistible

a small conveyance with a leather hood.
“she has written to you. how she torments herself, poor thing! she’s
at dinner and all that evening natásha was in a strange and unnatural

know that pair of women’s gloves?” (he referred to the masonic

“ah, i’m so sorry i wasn’t there when you met the children,” said
and of our army.


this assumption is all the more natural and inevitable because, watching
continued. during this interval pierre noticed that prince vasíli

“well?” asked pierre, seeing his friend’s strange animation with
of love and sadness. it was plain that she was following a train of
alone without any allies, it might perhaps have been a long time before
thinking he could have been received in such a manner only because

come directly,” pierre replied to the major-domo.
wanted, tell me! i will do anything,” said she, catching his eye.
he went on talking in this way in french, uttering only those words in
that these drawings represented the love adventures of the soul with its

her words were incoherent, but they attained the purpose at which she
screwing up his eyes and shaking with suppressed laughter, and unable
very still. just before the window was a row of pollard trees, looking
    chapter iii
awakening, she embraced her friend, but noticing sónya’s look of
wild virgin pine forest, and far away on the other side of the enns the
down on a sofa in the next room.
now so kind to her. natásha brightened up and felt almost in love with

not have refrained from had the armies been united and had someone else,
own army had melted away to half before reaching krásnoe and a whole


and returned a glove pierre had dropped; the doctors became respectfully

when footsteps or voices were heard did they look at one another, the
accurately. here now—wouldn’t one of these gentlemen like to ride over
to him. he declared that he did not wish to remember her existence and
death that overhung them, they dared not look life in the face. they
mildness.... and the feeling of enthusiasm and love for his sovereign
“it’s that protégé of yours, that sweet princess drubetskáya,
gives the singles and snatches the doubles!”

at those cramped dead firs, ever the same, and at me too, sticking out

water cart, painted green, stood in a shed; the paths were straight,
this buonaparte has turned all their heads; they all think of how he


denísov.
away.

those on foot, collapsed in a great mass, and some forty men who were on

the shed and approached pierre with a friendly wink.
question him. the man announced that the tsar had been driven in a
not wanted here? go to the other girls, or...”

circumstances, he nevertheless delivered the definite order that the
cause, which by the fact of its being unconditioned and unlimited would
felt stifled by the smoke which seemed to hang over the whole
chapter xxi
hundred rubles was left of that money, so that this seven of hearts
“ah, that is just what i tell him!” said she. “i don’t

“lavwúska!” he shouted loudly and angrily, “take it off,
he had taken from his sister and another ten thousand borrowed with
it was a portrait, painted in bright colors by gérard, of the son borne
“really, truly!” answered natásha, pushing in a crisp lock that had
but before the whip could reply, the hare, scenting the frost coming
in obedient submission to circumstances, he chose the latter and yielded
and his friend’s. he tried equally to avoid thinking about his wife,
riding round the wolf, crying “ulyulyu!” shouting and preparing to
have something to eat.”
walking through the rooms. in cellars and storerooms similar men were
her heart. happy the man who wins her! with her the least worldly of men

crimson float on the surface of that milky sea of mist. the whole french

sónya, blaming himself and commending her. he had asked princess mary to
yesterday and the question presented itself whether he ought or ought
bridge nesvítski found the colonel to whom he had to deliver the order,
“i don’t know, general....”

began her speech.


with the self-destruction toward which—ever dissecting and dissecting
limited for time, and with this difference too, that a knight is always
bilíbin came out to meet him. his usually calm face showed excitement.
comme il faut and in the latest fashion. this natásha noticed at once.
then he recalled the coarseness and bluntness of her thoughts and the
one, a young soldier, his face deadly pale, his shako pushed back, and
pierre, “i said at the time and before anyone else” (she insisted
visible in the snow and a shovel had been left sticking in one of the
high time!”
that the gates of the citadel had been barricaded and that there was
you—is that that man suffers, and this don juan, wicked fellow, is
improvised ball, and the rostóvs stayed on. anatole asked natásha for
guidance. the universal experience of ages, showing that children do
from them in practical activity. but when she heard of prince andrew’s
of dissolution in which all those who are in it are inevitably wiped
balashëv bowed his head with an air indicating that he would like to
it was evident that prince andrew’s ironical tone toward the pilgrims
government officials to his table, had unexpectedly selected michael
essential to speak the whole truth.
“is he tall and with reddish hair?” asked the doctor.
many wrinkles on his large features, to rostóv who was crimson with
left...” a fat major skirted a bush, puffing and falling out of

“handsome, isn’t she?” he whispered to natásha.

taken prisoner at boulogne, and why, later on, were those criminals whom
“oh yes, i understand,” said the governor’s wife.
that napoleon did not sit well or firmly in the saddle. the battalions
only the following considerations can have led the historians to such
“lieutenant count rostóv.”
and well informed foregathered when the news began to arrive in

only the really heartless, the stupid ones of that household, and the
when nicholas had been led away, princess mary again went up to her
involuntarily by this diminutive expressing his affection and the hopes


seeing that smile, rostóv involuntarily smiled himself and felt a still
rhetor, after a moment’s pause.
now then, darling! how will she take that si? she’s taken it! thank
she drew near to him and stopped. he took her hand and kissed it.
“is it about nicholas?” he asked.
perhaps she lacks egotism, i don’t know, but from her is taken away, and
nicholas put all his horses to a gallop and passed zakhár. the horses
of the rostóvs! well, mr. hussar, and what regiment do you serve in?”

behind him.
a letter has been written to the emperor in which the count asks for
in no way binding) might give time for part of the transport to pass,
“be so good...” shouted the captain, frowning angrily.
the half-closed eyes was there greedily gnawing a mutton bone, and the
emperor could not answer such a question. the troops are moved

     * history of the year 1812. the character of kutúzov and

rubbers he watched her and his friend.
sides had fallen in, another was on fire, and bright flames issued from


broken off, the porch, and the post by the side of the pavement. he
awful pain he suffered made him moan incessantly and piteously, and his
was not mean, and did not refuse anyone who asked of him. all he cared
not notice the sound of the bullets whistling from every side, or the


bayonets. but whether they were moving or stationary, whether they were
her, she is so much to be pitied, so much to be pitied.”
more cunning or subtle diplomatist—you know, a combination of french
for him undecided. already from his military experience and what he had
to his father with a very flushed face and said in his breaking voice

thrown back. his whole short corpulent figure with broad thick
courtyard and wished to see him.
life depended on it.
to smile but dared not even think of doing so. he made a piteous,
“one moment, princess, one moment, my dear! is this his son?” said the
they lost their discipline and rushed about according to the chance
same coalescence into a group of enormous dimensions; the same adhesion


and threw them round the little girl who had run in.
rostóv learned later that russian and austrian soldiers had been firing

are many stories of his getting to know an officer in just such a chance
orders. not one of these was, or could be, carried out.
in the best possible manner, and feeling that he was doing it well he
“may i kiss mamma?” he asked natásha.
and his eyes were rolled back. rostóv looked at the young soldier and a
joyous sensation.

twentieth time and finding some peculiarly deep meaning in each word of
kutúzov sighed deeply on finishing this paragraph and looked at the
the day after the opera the rostóvs went nowhere and nobody came to see

that rarely had so many beautiful women been assembled in one place.
beside him.
see! continual maneuvers, continual advances!” thought he. “what for?
not right.”
she seemed that day to be more than ever kind and affectionate to
in germany. but we, thank god, have no need to recognize his genius
when the review was over, the newly arrived officers, and also
prince andrew laughed disagreeably, again reminding one of his father.
wood a brown hare with white feet sprang out and, scared by the tramp of
unnatural way, he stretched out his hand for alpátych to kiss, and then
expression on the faces of the crowd of soldiers and militiamen who were

except on the supposition that he was drunk.
looking at her red face and chin (nearly always powdered), her moist
indifferent to them but regarded them with hostility. she heard
but remained in deserted moscow ever in the same state of agitation,
leave moscow and not dare to let her set eyes on him again. pierre—only
impulses has remained unknown.
go and tell lise.”
goliath...” she whispered.


selling their cattle and moving in whole families toward the southeast.
having something to eat. they hastily turned round to him asking if he
“all right. let monsieur de beausset enter, and fabvier too,” he said,
memory of the distant past. he felt himself not only free from social
smiling. “cela nous convient à merveille.*(2) suvórov now—he knew
they caught at his hand and kissed his shoulder he patted their backs

she tried to follow with understanding. when she understood them her
half an hour later kutúzov left for tatárinova, and bennigsen and his
was always ready to render the small services for which she had a gift,
possible and another that a saxon should be shot, on whom a letter
wrapped in paper.
peculiarly strong effect on him because at the sight of the fire he felt
still more lively and he chatted incessantly all through dinner.
always shall, and i want nothing more.”
observations as to what had been burned down and what this or that part
made by generals—as anyone of us sitting over a map in his study may
hints began to make the countess anxious and she glanced uneasily at


and with a furtive glance at his son’s face, the count went out of the
a convoy wagon became restive at the end of the bridge, and the whole

waited in expectation of an important order for an expensive funeral.
anna mikháylovna took off her gloves and, occupying the position she
once we begin judging and arguing about everything, nothing sacred
scenes they had witnessed during the campaign, and avoided all talk of
on these three considerations alone is based the conception of
horses. some of the horses were drowned and some of the men; the others
evening light and the blue tunics advancing from the other side with
attention to them. at the gate of one house three frenchmen, who were
on entering the room now he crossed himself, turning toward the front
at the front an altercation occurred between an austrian guide and a
and went to the window, involuntarily inhaling the freshness of the
bast matting and cover it with hay—that’s the way!”
after a few minutes’ bustle beside the high bedstead, those who had
think of what awaits them, but pass by, winking at the wounded. yet from

trying through the dowager empress márya fëdorovna to secure it for



horror and fear. all were still. pierre took his hands from his eyes.

stopping at the door, “why i’m especially fond of that music? it is
“i don’t know myself,” natásha answered quickly, “but i should not like
dórokhov’s detachment, the two small guerrilla detachments of figner and
“she is much better. she spoke so well today,” said princess mary.
nicholas and even made him regard bolkónski’s courtship skeptically.
dear. we will see how tarás distinguishes himself today. he says count
without exception, this consciousness without which no conception of man
against the pillow.
herself most of all were those of repentance. on her way home at an
and flask, and swung his heavy person easily into the saddle.
not only on that day, as he rode over the battlefield strewn with men
the voice of an old maidservant saying, “straight, straight, along the
instantly his regret at not having been in action and his dejected mood
working herself up to tears with the imaginary words of her pauvre mère
calling on the principal austrian dignitaries. between four and five
fortification of the krémlin, and drew up a brilliant plan for a future

full purity and strength.
execution. every order executed is always one of an immense number

the assistant looked fagged out. he was evidently vexed and impatient

impossible to prevent it. three regiments have been here and spent
in front of him.
purse and, drawing its rings aside with his small, white, turned-up

looked round to see where the smell came from. next he thought of that

self-satisfied, youthful, and constant smile of animation, and by the
anyone or taken anything that was not mine, but have only helped my
much the same as usual. these dispositions and orders only seem worse
he looked at her attentively.
cared about; anna pávlovna observed these greetings with mournful and
ordered to turn back to the right. several thousand cavalry crossed in
and so on—mistaking these for the real significance of the factor,
“‘grant leave to retire to his country seat to an old man who is
dismounted. he gave the reins to a cossack, took off and handed over his
“yes, capitally.”

“well, mamma? everything is ready. what’s the matter?” asked natásha, as




princesses was coming to take her turn at watching. “let us go.”

pale and then blushing.
the french army.
in the presence of tíkhon and the doctor the women washed what had been

shoulders and glanced at nicholas.

how, or by what means, he was connected with the great event foretold in
pierre appeared in the stalls. the rostóvs had not seen him since
advancing.”
more frequent complaints from his mother that their affairs were falling
concealment, or tried to extricate herself from her awkward position
understand. that’s what i’m up to.”

fear when her face is like that?” thought he, and placing himself before
“who?” asked rostóv.
we find that a command is executed only when it is related to a
“you see yours is already an officer in the guards, while my nicholas
could get to know one another. malvíntseva expressed approval, and the

the room next to the one where the prince lay. several times, waking up,
part where the current was swift. hundreds of uhlans galloped in after
would get on together. the husband, however, did not seem to share that
in me, but i and russia have a right to expect from you all the zeal,
“sónya! what is it? what is the matter?... oo... oo... oo...!” and

unite the meaning of all. to unite all?” he asked himself. “no, not
and, rushing headlong toward the porch with lifted tail, began rubbing
liked upsetting a driver or running down a pedestrian, and flying at
have proceeded. when newton enunciated the law of gravity he did not say
swooped down,” said the woman, pointing to the french soldiers.
suddenly, he did not know why, he felt a pang. the day was so beautiful,
“bonaparte has said so,” remarked prince andrew with a sarcastic
insulted envoy—especially as he had witnessed his unseemly anger. but,
repeating to himself at each alternate step, “left... left...
back to moscow. anatole kurágin’s father managed somehow to get his

a fight led murat to try to deceive kutúzov in a similar way. meeting
that she and i may be man and wife,” he told himself.
why she had to die, and in what way that death was but an expression
serenely and steadily at rostóv, seemed to be veiled by something,
“count! count!” shouted berg who ran up from the other side as eager
ran into ferapóntov’s yard before alpátych’s eyes. alpátych went out
right to fire when they liked as they approached the barrier. dólokhov
campaign by occupying moscow as he had ended a previous campaign by
the proportion of freedom to inevitability decreases and increases
chapter viii

“natásha,” he said, “you know that i love you, but....”
            100  110  120  130  140  150
and that the whole army had surrendered at ulm proved to be correct.
mary hendríkhovna assented and began looking for the spoon which someone

man—the other evidently a private or an orderly, sunburned, short, and
importance and that no time must be lost. he did not consider or ask
the evening at count kochubéy’s. he told the count of his interview
princess mary gazed intently into his eyes with her own luminous ones
platón, and at once resumed the story he had begun.
window sill, with a pale but radiant face.
sensation of those terrible whistling sounds and of the corpses around




he, going to the door and looking into the nursery.

natásha gave him her hand and went out. princess mary on the other hand

“forgive me!”
the count jumped up and, swaying from side to side, spread his arms wide
surmises concerning their collective activity.
and natásha, following the direction of that look, saw an exceptionally
longer his nor did he wish for it. he felt that his way of life had now
“fool, i told you the sable one! hey, matrëna, the sable!” he shouted so
which by this time there were now russian and now french soldiers,

progression with a common ratio of one tenth, and have found the sum of
all sides awaiting a word from him.

moment later he heard a cry from the wooded ravine that a fox had been
“ah, he has passed judgment... passed judgement!” said the old man in a
instructions to major ekonómov, he could not help taking notice of the

at eight o’clock in the morning
the mason. “yes, i never thought of it, but i have led a contemptible

officer, but in reply to the third question which he did not understand
onlookers for what was to follow. as soon as the provocatively gay

myself above him and so become much worse than he, for he is lenient
in the shops and houses—but there was no army.

nicholas alone was in danger the countess imagined that she loved her
gerásim and the porter let makár alexéevich go, and in the now silent
“now then, now then!” said she.
his time. but he is growing old, and though not exactly cruel he has too
success.”
a few minutes later prince andrew rang and natásha went to him, but
all was still. the whole sun appeared on the horizon and disappeared
looking at pierre. “at the present time it is difficult to know the
the emperor went in, and after that the greater part of the crowd began

    chapter xxvii
to russia after him, but all the same he knew that however long it might

we begin a very original and interesting series of maneuvers. our aim is

davout was not merely a french general, but a man notorious for his
his actions. he employed all his ability and strength to do the best he
another. and in fact his health was poor.

extinguished and some spirit lighted, as pierre knew by the smell, and
before him but the motionless earth and the stubble around him. there
prince andrew moved toward the door from whence voices were heard.
in petersburg. natásha with animated and excited face was telling him
for theology, ethics, and philosophy. history surveys a presentation of
ridicule. speránski related how at the council that morning a deaf
unfaithful wife, a retired gentleman-in-waiting, fond of eating and
at the dog who was pretending to be in earnest about biting him,
and tried to excuse herself, as if there had been something to be
changing his tone or attitude, “it must seem to you that everyone is
recounting his military exploits (prince andrew could not endure
london—could pronounce pitt’s sentence, he saw a well-built and
and got used to the idea that no one would oblige him to go anywhere
kind relation. but, nataly, you know my love for my son: i would do
it before?”
guided the event.
a moment, “yes, bring me seven hundred rubles, yes! but mind, don’t
bald hills. prince andrew, glancing at pierre, broke the silence now and



hares had already half changed their summer coats, the fox cubs were
pierre looked at timókhin with the condescendingly interrogative smile
expression only in her more and more beaming face and quivering nose.
unsuitable now, just because he plans out everything very thoroughly and
of a surgeon who has just performed a difficult operation and admits the
affinity are only distinguished from one another in that they are
speak, so now she could not believe that that little creature could be

tables and the same chandelier with a cover over it; but someone had
then denísov’s voice was heard shouting farther and farther away.
chapter ix

which dólokhov’s second had called on him, and, having closed the
“but as you are a philosopher, be a consistent one, look at the other




wounded officer?”
be of no use to you; they are worth nothing and have shown it by making
stopped pierre asking if he did not know french.
either in front of them or to the right or left, but there were soldiers
them that when they have thought of two or three contingencies” (he
eight, returning after a sleepless night, he sent for embers, changed
have no money, so i was going to ask the count...”
in the hall she met her father, who had returned with bad news.


glory and grandeur. one after another they hasten to display their
recalcitrant cavalry colonel, his own dignity as a general, and above
excitement was going on there.
those confined there were awaiting a decision which might come any day
on the sixth, which was his name day when the house would be full of
“oh yes, and what do the masonic brothers say about war? how would they
prince bagratión, having reached the highest point of our right flank,
baggage and transport, having to accept battle on the march against an
him. he carried his resolution within himself in terror and haste, like

oats were standing, and some bushes near which rose the smoke of
have to prove to them what he had not merely convinced himself of, but
adopted to lure napoleon into the depths of russia, and this plan some
to go home on leave. why he had to go he did not know; but after his
feu, et oublie celui qu’il devait faire faire sur l’ennemi!” *(2)
chapter iv
commands, letters, reports, and orders of the day; called one another




instructions.
“why haven’t they carried him away?” pierre was about to ask, but seeing
666; that his part in the great affair of setting a limit to the


he reaches paris, the dissolution of the republican government, which a
the battle of borodinó, with the occupation of moscow that followed it


without linking up the events of the day or drawing a conclusion
on his way home from vorontsóvo, as he was passing the bolótnoe place
remember!”
passage leading to the rooms on the ground floor. the count’s face was


which made a certain sensation, the count exchanged glances with
indifference, and benevolence toward all, which cannot be acquired
the strength of that impetus was exhausted and no fresh push was
willarski, whom pierre had known slightly in petersburg society, came
thought sónya as she stood in the dark passage, “now or never i must

natural and agreeable for them to think that the activity of their class
think that i cannot know it; so i do not try to know it and i talk about
of horses galloping forward was heard, shouts came from various sides,
“one thing i thank god for is that i did not kill that man,” said
battle there.
he knew very well that this was napoleon, but napoleon’s presence could
“to his honor baron asch, from general-in-chief prince bolkónski,” he
made for crossing as by what took place at the bridges. when the bridges
significantly.
their own resources what might be needed for the success of the fete.
eagerly and rather disdainfully, not resting on anything although his
sharpshooters with discharged muskets, standing in the center of the
happy, and as widow of the grand... the prince would no longer be making
does not quite see it; more particularly as it is he and his corps who

“count!” exclaimed the timid yet theatrical voice of vereshchágin in the
that’s not it.” something else, resembling remorse, tormented him. “yes,



first time since their encounter concerning telyánin. rostóv, feeling
position, straightened himself, adjusted his feet, and leaned back again
“let no one know of it!” the emperor added with a frown.

room at nine in the morning.

neck and the corners of her mouth drooped.
greatest glory of the russian army. many heroes have been described to
pretty, and agile—she swims and rides splendidly... and her voice! one
with so and-so,’ and then i take a cab and go myself two, three, or
bulk with evident ease.

convoy? release them, that’s all about it!”




is.... that’s what convinces, that is what has convinced me,” said
márya dmítrievna and the countess burst out laughing, and all the
dreamed that she saw her sons lying dead. after many consultations and
vílna. in that wealthy town, which had not been injured, he found old
of international relations, conquests, and alliances, the historians are
papers have to be signed.”
anatole, having taken off his overcoat, sat with arms akimbo before a
gone and that his wife was no more. “oh, how good, how splendid!”
the abandonment of the city in which her greatness is centered and in
now necessary that man, governed by his senses, should find in virtue
moment these men might have been seized with horror at what they were

in french. it was count rostopchín. he told kutúzov that he had come
question to davout.
and lastly, the final departure of the great emperor from his heroic
of its honeyed firmness and softness.
to irresistible, youthful, childish drowsiness. “but what was i
among the young men introduced by rostóv one of the first was


and frenchmen running toward it. higher up stood some russian infantry,
“this is what i want, my dear fellow,” said the count to the
kutúzov writes...” and he screamed as piercingly as if he wished to
days at the karágins’, and every day on thinking the matter over

just then pétya came running in from the drawing room.
her.

sallow-faced, short, stout woman, the empress mother, with her smile
the squadron; but when he had gone more than halfway he began to forget

at pierre. while one hand hung up the first string the other was already
had accumulated at the sight of all that was being done in the army.
with thoughts and anxieties as to be oblivious of his presence. he

moonlight.
up and change, but up to the first of september nothing had done so.
with that peculiar lift in the note that indicates that they are after
this speech not only made a strong impression, but created excitement in
to appear calm added: “and don’t imagine i have said this in a

when he had parted from malvíntseva nicholas wished to return to the
him, having apparently lost hope of getting him to wake up.
love someone dear to you with human love, but an enemy can only be loved
i, above all, who am to blame for everything. help me, teach me, and
riot?
ever-quickening music, being the rhythmic click of the spurs on his
the women.”
good news? there has been an encounter with mortier? a victory? it was
have tried to put them somewhere under cover,” nicholas continued

is budding. but though i do not know what causes the cold winds to blow
    chapter xi

konovnítsyn’s handsome, resolute face with cheeks flushed by fever,
times unexpectedly interrupted. once he stopped it by shouting: “the
chapter viii

asking for. i need only advise anything and his highness is sure to do
joins the allies, austria’s hand will be forced and there will be war.
andrew, told how bonaparte wishing to test markóv, our ambassador,
fire, and the frosts—and instead of genius, stupidity and immeasurable
and the glory that awaited him.
the attention of all the superior officers, the militiamen and soldiers
transit gloria mundi.”
though undone is but one,’ as the proverb says, but with thirteen in
“and do you remember,” natásha asked with a pensive smile, “how
the contrary case, your majesty, i shall see myself forced to repel an
forward. “it’s in my ears. but perhaps it’s music of my own. well, go
possibility of being what they were. and they with their simple, kind,
well-known, so-called sophism of the ancients consisting in this, that
wish to negotiate.

at all as i ran,” thought prince andrew—“not as we ran, shouting
longer there, since she was no more.
“is it possible to forget?” said she.
conceal its effects—the surroundings in which he had been happy became

confirm this supposition—then she told herself that only she, with her
st. bartholomew was not due to charles ix’s will, though he gave the
masses of troops—ours and the enemy’s. the ground to the right—along the
what pierre did not know was that the place where they presented him
she was right,” he thought, remembering what the governor’s wife had
what i have seen. the troops are in complete disorder....”
the beginning of the new year. natásha was still as much in love with
for some days the weather had been calm and clear with slight frosts in
which the rostóvs always attended. he was pointedly attentive to sónya
looking at something concealed under a cloth.
dmítrievna was to speak again but natásha cried out:

prove that i remember the family’s goodness to me and that i love
“where are headquarters?”
prince vasíli.
detached himself from earthly life. to love everything and everybody and

from his suite, which waited respectfully, began to pace up and down
who lay motionless some distance from him with his head thrown back, was
pressed two fingers together and the badge was between them. then he
dog could eat all it wanted.
“no apologies, none whatever,” said dólokhov to denísov (who on
had not left prince vasíli’s and felt with terror that in people’s
and listened to stories of potëmkin’s and suvórov’s campaigns, or

“what do you want, my pretty?” said ilyín with a smile.
himself whether the news was good or bad. that did not interest him. he
despite count bezúkhov’s enormous wealth, since he had come into an
he cautiously released the shoulder she leaned on, looked into her face,
“i remember,” answered nicholas. “i remember that i came to you

their thick, bushy eyebrows sternly scanned all present and rested on
pierre went down the corridor, trying to avoid making a noise or meeting
he did not renounce his opinions, but felt himself in some way to blame
accounts with the horse dealers. when he had finished that business it
the commander of the dragoons had already retreated beyond the dip in
greatness. he rode hurriedly from the battlefield and returned to the

without aim or object for her existence. she ate, drank, slept, or kept
my wife,” said prince andrew to himself quite to his own surprise, as

stone, moskvá, and yaúza bridges.
infantry, cavalry, and artillery. how was it that two guns were


house was dominated by the same feeling that princess mary experienced
do me the favor.”
laws. history stands on the same path. and if history has for its object

all that has happened.”
“kiss me here,” and he touched his cheek: “thanks, thanks!”
and having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave, she
pierre could not go on. he gulped and turned away.
command entrusted to barclay. but as barclay did not inspire confidence
passed, and at the cost of that temporary unpleasantness he had obtained


differently, but i’m sorry for your father, so i will conceal it.”
“i haven’t been in the room. it must be where you put it.”
nicholas, though free from denísov’s readiness to find fault with
could be seen.
chapter xiv

parents who have petted their children from babyhood, but which prince
he stretched out his hand to take hold of the purse. rostóv let go of



plan long ago and now expounded it not so much to answer the questions
at its halting place—a village on the highroad. the quartermasters who

say something but could not. her brother had guessed right: the little
rostóvs remained, but he did not go to see them.

“if you please, miss! allow me,” said the maid, who on her knees was
“bravo! ha, ha, ha!” rose their rough, joyous laughter from all sides.
gradually weaker pierre kept away from him. pierre did not know why, but
a whole month. napoleon’s position is most brilliant. he can either fall
dragging away boards, dry wood, and thatch from the roofs, for the
rose higher and higher in her throat as she more and more clearly

his whole body and eagerly listened to her story. “yes, yes... so he
as a frenchman would speak after spending about a year in russia.
though all pierre’s interest was now centered in that house, by the
the bells in the krémlin were ringing for vespers, and this sound
doctor with a bow and approached them silently and with a look of

“if there were reasons...” she began.
could be heard above the three hundred others. he nearly wept. “to the
pierre’s direction at a slight rustle made by the latter. “why have
of our life we shall more quickly reach our aim, but on the contrary,

“who are you talking about?”
of human feeling, strained to the utmost, that had held the crowd in

but the adjutant turned his horse about and rode on.
your interests as with a kinswoman, a good, kind, true relation. and i

your denísov though he is a rake and all that, still i like him; so

“now i am all right,” she said, and asking the vicomte to begin, she
visitors and arranged about refreshments for the gentry and the serfs,

“but i’ll send an orderly.... two of them!” said rostóv. “what an idea,


“but the law, religion...” said the prince, already yielding.

i ask you to go with all your belongings to our estate near moscow, and
mademoiselle bourienne jumped up eagerly.
that affair for me and i shall always be your most devoted slave-slafe
frightened gesture of anatole’s. “first, the letters,” said he, as if
“and mine have had nothing for two weeks,” said denísov.
“is it true that the countess has fallen into the clutches of the holy
house prince andrew had built at boguchárovo, ever in the same state,



was already full of people. there were people not only in the square,
pétya clenched his teeth and looked around, throwing back his head and
emperor, liked and respected by alexander. then why those severed
her glance and in every motion, she looked at the visitors and, with
at that time in the rostóvs’ house there prevailed an amorous
abruptly.

“oh, your excellency!” said franz, with difficulty rolling the
“glad to do our best!” shouted the soldiers.

would pass that way. halfway lay some snow-covered piles of firewood and

showing that despite these losses his income would not be diminished but
present, suddenly pushed forward with a scared and angry look and wanted
“the general orders them all to be driven out at once, without fail.
uniformed austrian officer.
“but he must be a freemason,” said he, referring to the abbé whom
he felt that he no longer looked presentable, and feared that if he were
from the hall of the nobility the emperor went to that of the merchants.
bitch that caught it! go to law, indeed!... he snatches at the fox! i
generals, however, understood it and, leaving aside the question of
“oh, oh, oh! what have they done?” the prisoners on one side and another
“i assure you that the town of smolénsk is not in the slightest danger
window, with a thin, pale, and spiteful face. she glanced round at him,



“our lives and property—take them, your majesty!”
the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating


at the entrance to princess mary’s house pierre felt doubtful whether


“no, it cannot be! how happy i am! but it can’t be.... how happy i am!
turn: that a court-martial had been appointed, and that in view of the
that soldier passed on, and after him came another sitting on a cart.
as became known later, he had scarcely begun to address the merchants


anger and distress. but his strength soon began to fail him, and looking
they were all hurrying when they had nowhere to hurry to and were
hommes massacrés et l’armée de nos alliés détruite, et vous
telling it all to natásha he experienced that pleasure which a man has
arrival and of thanksgiving for the conclusion of peace with the
he mounted and rode toward semënovsk.
subject, but the count returned to his troubles.
the last navvy struck it for the last time with his mattock. in historic
only what was limited, petty, commonplace, and senseless. he had
it would be a mistake to think that this is ironic—a caricature of the
behind them sat anna mikháylovna wearing a green headdress and with a
these did not meet with success either. the theaters set up in the
always happens in such cases rivalry sprang up as to which should get
and every strap in place, and shone with cleanliness. and not only


suddenly seemed to him dull and tiresome, and he experienced an
examines arbitrarily selected elements of that motion; but at the
they might be laughing at his way of life) he himself joined in the
only when bennigsen had entered the hut did kutúzov leave his corner and
pleasure of being courted often stifles real feeling in her. and it must


three daughters besides a son for whom she had longed and whom she was
surprise. then came the prayer just received from the synod—a prayer for
of war; count bennigsen, the senior general in rank; the grand duke
last few days. the antagonists stood forty paces apart at the farther
and history itself understand alike this relation between necessity and
“there, fedótov, you should be quartered on them!”
the blood rushed to natásha’s face and her feet involuntarily moved, but
december 4. today when andrúsha (her eldest boy) woke up he did not
town next day. pierre still considered that it would be a useful and
“if we fought before,” he said, “not letting the french pass, as
    chapter xv

“uncle pierre, you... no... if papa were alive... would he agree with
highness bread and salt. “her husband has welcomed his serene highness
to understand in what this dependence consists it is necessary to
compassionate eyes.
said perónskaya, indicating hélène who had just entered. “how

she returned to the garden and sat down on the grass at the foot of the
finally there were six thousand rubles for his outfit and various other
deliberating,” continued napoleon with the same derisive and
counsels, his undertakings, and his work; strengthen his kingdom by
besides this, the whole staff of the russian army was now reorganized.
again raised his cap to natásha) “but as for counting skins and what
soul and his face.
wonder-worker on his breast, and his way of speaking and everything he
no action been taken against the enemy or for the relief of the ancient
latter and no one else, while showing servile respect to kutúzov, could

hand, lacking the spirit to die stinging him; the rest are dead and fall
among the gentry of the province nicholas was respected but not liked.


answer to his doubts and to confirm the fact that now he understood and


were heard in the room. natásha looked round at her, and then, red

anatole kurágin whom he felt it necessary to encounter. on reaching

halfway. fine orders!” was being repeated on different sides.
of those fifty thousand men who were left in hospitals and in graves
“it is all, all her fault,” he said to himself; “but what of that?

search of somebody and answered all her questions in monosyllables. he
it seemed to pierre, sunk in profound and calm meditation. his servant
was safe from cossacks.

intimate, came to him with the professions of friendship and intimacy
intriguing; in the body of the army they did not ask themselves where

is the only thing left me—not singing!” his thoughts ran on. “go
did that genius, napoleon, know it, for no one issued any orders to
steward there, who, bowing respectfully, looked into his face and at
secretary rather than commander in the army. my removal from the army

many months she felt calm and not oppressed by the thought of the life
purse that sank into the sofa. “as for us, count, we get along on our

his eyes and thought he would never open them again. suddenly he was
comprehension.

excellency?... nobody knows.”
huge family coach in which she had traveled to vorónezh, a semiopen
princess, with the long waist and hair plastered down like a doll’s,
room, looked at princess mary in bewildered surprise. herself a
a rupture gazed at her son with terror, but in the obstinacy and
raising his voice, said to pierre, as though continuing an interrupted


historians who described the event later and the men who then surrounded
something as she rapidly crossed herself. seeing her mother she jumped

commander of all the forces, and the emperor did not assume that
on, his eyes fixed on the conqueror whose fame had reached him across


he recognized her, guessed her feelings, saw that it was her début,
nods with acquaintances near her. from habit she scrutinized the ladies’
is the army retreating or will there be another battle?”
rhapsodies about valor, devotion, and so forth, must reluctantly admit

prince vasíli became thoughtful and frowned. anna mikháylovna saw that
been inherited by his son, whose guardian he was.
shown, fired. not at all expecting so loud a report, pierre shuddered
hundred rubles he had a long column of figures scored against him,
his wound reopened and the doctor said he ought to go away for a

shadow of the wall. pausing for a moment, pierre noticed several other
out on the logs. without lifting his head he said something, and two of
unnecessary. they were not in the least abashed. the old woman, lowering
fine weather. a short, swarthy lieutenant colonel of hussars with thick
and that they were being taken to the proper place. pierre felt himself


began to expound his plans to a general sharing his quarters, until
right and high up in the sky was the sickle of the waning moon and
“we shall if everybody wants it; it can’t be helped.... but believe

and are no good to anyone.” she stood by her mother’s side and exchanged
the mines and blow up the bridge, this sergeant, seeing that the french
involuntary shudder ran down his spine. in the corporal’s changed face,
in this house. go! don’t let me set eyes on you; beg her pardon!”
one foot, from the orderly and began to mount.
said to her, went to the looking glass and arranged her hair and scarf.
the enemy’s fires, but heard the shouting of the french more loudly
along the road, trying not to miss anything of importance.
“it’s a shame for a soldier to steal; a soldier must be honest,
“natásha, i don’t understand you. and what are you saying! think of
unknown essence of life while that essence itself can only be the
natásha.
detachment and by evening found his master, nicholas rostóv, quartered
nothing but meanness, deceit, envy, intrigue, and ingratitude—the
action, and more than that, you can’t make me believe that you do not
chapter xv
time that evening, vainly expecting someone, now smiling at someone, now
another prodded his horse with the butt end of a musket, and pierre,
“him... i want him... now, this minute! i want him!” said natásha,
same place on the poklónny hill awaiting the deputation. his speech to
activity controls people’s actions, for that view is not confirmed by
      20   30   40   50   60   70   80   90
time, anna mikháylovna sent someone to call her son, and went into the
“strange and impossible as such happiness seems, i must do everything

and arguments proves to him that the complete freedom of which he is
had the ear of the company.

young brothers who were influential through their connections or rank,


portfolio, and changed her grip.
that it must live in water, so god had made him such that he must spend
they be ensnared when they know it not, and may the plots they have laid
been written was only one intermediate stage in its destruction, and
activity of the millions who migrate, burn houses, abandon agriculture,

emperor at once rode up to him, offered his services, and assisted him
“go and choose denísov. he is a real dancer, a wonder!” he said.
it to the saddle. their horses, bridled and with high saddles, stood
at his estate. as regularity is a prime condition facilitating activity,
firmness, and success which your intellect, military talent, and the
hussar cornet zherkóv had at one time, in petersburg, belonged to
long since and often occurred to him during his military activities—the
late that night, when all had separated, denísov with his short hand
officers ran after and around them shouting, “hurrah!”
“come, dear princess,” said mademoiselle bourienne, “just one more
campfires—the soldiers’ kitchens.

pierre glanced round at the speaker and saw that it was a soldier who
love her.
sergeant of poniatowski’s corps, who explained in polish that he had
his utmost to look as small as possible. he looked at the count, who
“about your sister,” ejaculated denísov testily.
princess mary postponed her departure. sónya and the count tried to
for the french vanguard; rostóv, as a careful squadron commander, wished
he commanded was in an almost hopeless position. the spy reported that
rostóv still had the same indefinite feeling, as of shame.
was not offensive to his master. nicholas knew that this daniel,
be they what they might.
a rule to speak out... well, what answer am i to take? will you come to
of love and self-sacrifice. and cost what it may, i will arrange
wars, revolutions, and conquests—are presented by these historians
reading his paper and specially drew rostóv’s attention to the

hands. it is essential for him to combine his movements with those of
effort, and stress, like the opening of a door grown rusty on its
he write in those idiotic broadsheets that anyone, ‘whoever it might be,


of the russian commanders kutúzov alone understood this. when the flight
“yes, and so you are once more an eligible bachelor,” said princess

natásha.
“your honor, the generals!” said the sergeant, riding up to rostóv.
death, and prince andrew died.

because her nose had to be cleared, and so on. what for people in their
grand-patience as usual, when pierre and natásha came into the drawing
though none of the column commanders rode up to the ranks or talked to

“well then, what do you want? you’re all in love nowadays. well,
to address him. (borís understood that arakchéev envied balashëv and
thirteen more men he will be three times as strong as i am.

was expected in moscow, where old prince bolkónski was spending the
had at last been realized. in the clear morning light he gazed now at


possession of the family, but the rejoicing was external and insincere.
woods, there burst from the muskets small cloudlets that had no time
the hill to the right in the courtyard of the farm, as he called the
﻿
him, was restraining her sobs. her face was pale and rigid. only in the


“the word attack is always on your tongue, but you don’t see that we are
fear appeared on her flushed face.
he sighed and looked down.
counteract it as far as they can.”
“perhaps,” coldly and angrily replied dólokhov, glancing at sónya,
and so on. similarly a man who committed a murder twenty years ago and
“nicholas! get up!” natásha’s voice was again heard at the door.
such orders were given by the officers on the spot nearest to the
and began to speak.
the other side of the room. “how young-looking he is!”
ground like cliffs and slopes. anywhere, on any side, one might
pierre to translate what he said.
and that stupid people might meanly despise him on account of his
the count turned and saw on his right mítka staring at him with eyes
beauty, youth, and happiness, as well as by jealousy of her brother’s
“oh, i really did not mean to hurt her feelings. i understand them so
being gloomy. for the same reason they are always hard at work and in a

of suffering and death for himself. at that moment he did not desire

move on. the horses moved off the bank. the ice, that had held under
the clear blue eyes looked at the commander in chief just as boldly as
tones in which she had been wont to sing, and listened attentively to
old count’s with a trotter from the orlóv stud as shaft horse,
collapsing and again slowly rising to the sound of whispered rhythmic
please. that is all i ask. monsieur pierre, you say.... that’s all i
“i ask one thing of you,” he said sternly, “to obey me and not shove
chapter xxxii

bore almost the same smile, expressing unseemly thoughts about the

was a pole, disputed with the commissariat officer, arguing that he was
he said something more, but rostóv did not wait to hear it and rode


at her reproachfully. “and who is it she takes after?” thought the
it...” answered her son coldly. “but i have promised and will do it
various figures worked upon it, at the other was something resembling an
if to allow them a respite, a quarter of an hour passed during which
roll, had supper, and settled down round the fires for the night—some
interrupted by the enthusiastic shouts of the audience.
years of their lives on that business. but, above all, that thought
minute’s pause. “he says she’s moved them into the otrádnoe
feeble voice of the commander in chief was heard. the regiment roared,
especially to the young.
regiment. the men soon accepted pierre into their family, adopted him,
smolénsk was abandoned contrary to the wishes of the emperor and of the
complete bewilderment. “only so could i be completely happy; but now i
all-important.”
seemed grotesque and amazing to natásha. she could not follow the opera

blissful feeling such as he had not experienced for a long time. all the

them; we call those forces gravitation, inertia, electricity, animal
handing a pipe he had finished to an hussar riding behind him, with as

alive could understand or explain.
that bulged on his round shoulders, moved slowly along the road on his
“love a man once for all and remain true to him forever? that is what
also entering the regiment. on returning home pétya announced resolutely


her fortune and my good management we can get along nicely. i am not
nicholas the flattering things princess mary said of him and vice
“good-by, peter kirílych!” pierre heard the other voices repeat.

could understand all that she understood and all there was in her.
there was one pilgrim, a quiet pockmarked little woman of fifty called


“it’s all very well for you... i am not envious... i love you and
anatole came up to her. she still could not see him. she only felt a
never reach absolute inevitability.


“again!” she commanded, pointing with a peremptory gesture to the spot
they don’t see it!” came identical shouts from the ranks all along the


urging of horses, and the swearing of soldiers, orderlies, and officers.
“ah, that’s always the way!” said nesvítski with a wave of the

contradict one another.
glittering ornaments, he rejoined his suite who were respectfully
straight to the shed where his horses and trap were. the coachman was
delighted that from their point of view as plasterers, everything is now
it was nine o’clock in the morning. the fog lay unbroken like a sea
ribbons.
sent an order for him to report at headquarters.
will begin. and he says buonaparte is in braunau! shows you’re a fool.
after six rubbers the general got up, saying that it was no use playing
continually deplored the ignorance and poverty of russia and its
lope farther to the left to the very place where they were standing.
all rubbish! i saw chivalry and flags of truce in 1805; they humbugged
his head he let it droop and again closed his eye.
column marches... the third column marches...” and so on, read
fine cords would soon get a bit rubbed,” said an infantryman, wiping
it was taking place at the english club and someone near and dear to him
army aroused that horror in napoleon. he sat silently on a campstool
gave a loud exclamation, flushed, and ran out of the room.
impatient the nearer they got to moscow.
“what is the matter with you, my darling? you look pale. oh, you
which denísov, without alluding to the offenses of the commissariat
“but, my poor catiche, it is as clear as daylight! he will then be the
a word and has no real existence. but to understand phenomena man
herself in here for? but i will give her a piece of my mind. the time

on receiving this dispatch the emperor sent prince volkónski to kutúzov

closed eyes.
little as nicholas had occupied himself with sónya of late, something

“anatole used to come to borrow money from her and used to kiss her


that the story about sergéy kuzmích, the laughter, and the food
men—the best in the world and led by the best general—could be destroyed
then with remarks which showed that he was in a good temper.
his appearance in moscow, and of course in the karágins’ drawing


unappreciated bliss, long past. he could not conceive that a stupid
round the corner of the house between two dragoons. he had a long thin
arm and stepping back from the door.
appear evidently less free than a man’s entry into marriage today. it is
interesting.”

“it’s not my business!” he exclaimed, and strode on quickly down one of
“has he taken his medicine?”
but he scowled at her angrily though also with suffering in his eyes,
“come along!”

clown—dimmler—and the lady—nicholas—started a dance. surrounded
to anybody, and especially to him, whether or not they found out that
firm faces surrounded his benefactor on all sides. but though they were

all right on a loaded cart....”

next day, by márya dmítrievna’s advice, count rostóv took natásha
kaysárov recited.... kutúzov smilingly nodded his head to the rhythm of
line (the guards) was already in action.
in such relations that the more directly they participate in performing

in the beginning of the winter of 1805-6 pierre received one of anna
there were troops to be seen everywhere, in front and to the right and

inquiring look. he was about to stoop over her hand and kiss it, but
restrained animation as he stood sipping tea from a delicate chinese
not to be trifled with either—in a word, he was a real master!”
rostóv reined in his horse, and his eyes sought his foe to see whom he
in as far as that was in his power.
“ah, from vienna? very good. later, later!”
higher, his eyes shone with the light of life, and with swift steps
but even if—imagining a man quite exempt from all influences, examining
days of her girlhood, but i know what she is like every time we receive
immensity of the power they constituted.
it was clearing, and over the tops of the trees clouds were swiftly
in the village of hosjeradek there were russian troops retiring from
soon.
     of receipt of the work.
“why are they leaving the town?” asked alpátych.
exhausted and six thousand men sacrificed to defend it till late at
even little nicholas exchanged looks in silence. the old prince returned
range and wipe them out?” these were the questions each man of the
after giving the clerk orders about the work to be done, alpátych, not
he needs money for food; the man said an officer had once given him a
repulsive than any other, because he imagines that he knows the
    chapter xv

opened the door which moved noiselessly and easily. she paused at the


that had been so humiliating in her morning’s visit.
aggrandizement antinational. i should have associated my son in the
“no, impossible!” said prince andrew, laughing and pressing
he paused at the sight of pierre. his face quivered and immediately

kinds, from monarchs to journalists, who lead the masses. instead of the
“yes—that is, how do you mean?” said pierre. “not being a military man
“he is a man in a gray overcoat, very anxious that i should call
read it.
officers were whispering together. dólokhov was a long time mounting
began to wail as they looked at the fires—the smoke and even the flames
seemed that the ball the hussars were giving in honor of the polish
head cook, about asparagus, fresh cucumbers, strawberries, veal, and
followed behind, talking and shouting.
pierre was not at all surprised at this question. he understood his
the grand cross of maria theresa, and the whole army received rewards.
the soldiers crowded against one another with terrified faces, and
work nearer to her.
so that it appears to confirm what they desire, and he knew how readily
desperate weeping of a woman close to him. he stopped as if awakening

he was surrounded, and talking, disputing, and joking began. when there
well as by the proximity of the enemy, resolved to advance. all his men
it for manners’ sake, he drank it and wiped his mouth with a red silk
need some money.”
natásha lay on the bed and in the semidarkness of the room scanned
“under the lower pillow.”
down as a stone and raise me up as a loaf!” and every morning on getting
or a sick child was convalescent, or when she and countess mary spoke of
matter.

nearer, faster and louder, louder and faster, a cannon ball, as if it
carriage horses on their heads, turning them aside, others fought among
and fell on his hands. the others outstripped him.
old count, suddenly setting to work, kept passing from the yard to the
coming out of the hut into the damp, dark night konovnítsyn
vyazmítinov, the new military governor general of petersburg, had

nicholas took the two letters, one of which was from his mother and
had been doing, as though it were all an old-time story, and he listened
prince andrew looked at his sister. in the dim shadow of the curtain her

    chapter ix
as the bearers, among whom was anna mikháylovna, passed the young man
wards, consisting of three rooms, the doors of which stood open. there
in killed, wounded, sick, and stragglers; though a number of sick and
uselessly.
the rules—as if there were any rules for killing people. in spite of the
mission; the abundance of provisions at tarútino; the reports coming in
therefore when describing some single state they assume that particular
priceless man, but he’s sixty. is he to go up for examination?”
“what did he say? where to, now? halt, is it? did he thank us?” came
archduke’s as good as another, as you know) and even if it is only
dead and so-and-so was married, which she would again be unable to
and began to understand its different branches, it was the serf who
kissed her hand and went out.
seem most likely to interest him—the impending danger. during the

men.
the soldiers, who threw sidelong glances at pierre, got the fire to burn
interest to them. and all for me!”
leaning with his arms on the back of the sofa, sat in his former
at two o’clock that night he sent for his secretary, shishkóv, and told
event must be allowed to disturb the appointed order of the day. prince
they reached borodinó, seventy miles from moscow. from vyázma napoleon
when an event is taking place people express their opinions and wishes
he knew or a stranger, so unlike himself did the corporal seem at that


escape discipline. in general they regard smolénsk as the place where
when the reading which lasted more than an hour was over, langeron again
shouted.
quarreled and even fought with other companies for them. before they had
itself, rejoicing at the emperors’ approach, had naturally burst into


any moment.)
the mother’s sacrificing herself and offering her daughter in marriage
what he was laughing at. everything her father did inspired her with

taken such possession of him, but he remembered nothing of the past,

his dressing gown and smiled slightly, as if expressing respectful
to get away: at that moment she hated the stiff, elderly princess, who
dangerous.
“and now, in token of candor, i ask you to reveal to me your chief
before. as soon as i saw him i felt he was my master and i his slave,
it, and again the women and men of weaker mold, pétya among them, wept
might take it amiss that the mistress was being detained. dron was of

society of her relatives—countess mary, and her brother, her mother, and
old man’s bald head shining in the sun and seeing by the expression on
saddlecloth. on approaching alexander he raised his hat, and as he did

put this man back in his place and bring him water.
man—seem less guilty, that is, less free and more subject to the law of

killed one hare and wounded another. following the wounded hare he made
course of the kolochá and moskvá rivers—was broken and hilly. between
she should not speak french so much. it’s not the time for it now.”

mustache. “i want to know what you men are like. are you the same as
on, my music! now!...”
drawing room.
“no, i only wonder how you managed to get away from your regiment.
you positively that hélène is as innocent before you as christ was
of his life could he understand goodness, beauty, or truth, or the
thereby extended the frontiers of france) talked in vienna and by
look fixed on him on his right, and he turned. close to the corner, on
it was a shell) “either proving fatal at once or being very slight,”
lovely eyes there was a look of fearful joy and hope that was also new


would be taken immediately to free his serfs—and that till then they
one of her customary states in which she needed the mental exertion of
translators: louise and aylmer maude


“come! come with me, we’ll have a talk,” said he.
hostility and suspicion. for some seconds all were silent.

authorities to secure advantageous means of communication for herself
from me,” said he. “i have served twenty-three years and have done no
said without sitting down. “a person of very high standing in our

his back to natásha and now facing her, but during the whole of the six
control in case of an engagement.

previous and of the impending battle. some cossacks on the prowl for
head, but the instant he turned to prince andrew the firm, intelligent
natásha’s looks, as everyone told her, had improved in the country,
many laws but no one to carry out the old ones. nowadays everybody
“what do you mean?” asked speránski quietly, lowering his eyes.
grandee of catherine’s time who now lay dying in moscow. the young man
affect them and they did not feel it necessary to foment their grief.
officers (of whom there are fewer) perform the action itself less
“you see, my dear sir, i have read your project,” interrupted

of him—at the battery. he now saw clearly the figure of a red-haired

his colonel.
china, bronzes, pictures, and mirrors that had been so carefully
said the countess, indignant that they should have dared to treat this
opportunity to air it. it was one of the millions of proposals, one as

“ah, those damned germans! they don’t know their own country!”
himself in his report, written in hot haste after the battle, speaks of
“well then, sell it,” said he. “what’s to be done? i can’t draw back
command, i shall let my beard grow to here” (he pointed halfway down his
“aren’t you ready? it is nearly ten,” came the countess’ voice.
but had never spoken to her of love. now he felt that it was inevitable,
this: “it was an awful sight—children abandoned, some in the flames...
and others like them walking singly across the field shouting and
nicholas bolkónski also in a whisper.
the emperor an icon of the venerable sergius. it was regarded as a model
and from the consequent presence there of an indefinite, conditional,
smile.


breaking rank, mingled with the french guards and sat down at the tables
the road, and heard his friend the captain reprimand and threaten to
go!”

“a bear, lads,” said one of the men.
narrowed disdainfully, he entered the room of the minister of war with
along with it.
my hands. scarcely had i torn it off before another, a bigger one, began
“no! no! no! when your father writes to tell me that you are behaving

“natásha! now it’s your turn. sing me something,” they heard the
attitude.
power based on itself and always consistently directing its nations
the saltánov dam being “a russian thermopylae,” and of how a deed worthy
me to burn the bridge! i know the service, and it is my habit orders


consolations the one true catholic religion affords in this world and
suddenly an electric shock seemed to run through natásha’s whole being.
that he ought to avoid her and go away, pierre, despite that decision,
some swarthy men and women were really entering from the cold outside
action whatever of denísov’s. that was why pétya had blushed and grown
was humiliating, in her position rose vividly to her mind. “they, the
heard on every side.
waiting for a seven to turn up, gazed at dólokhov’s hands which held
still further south to the túla road. having crossed over, by a forced
petersburg plan) special hopes had been placed by the russians, and
exasperated with one another and, long after the action had begun on
beg you to consider yourself free, and to be assured that, in spite of

politeness and to start conversation, they asked him a few questions
rustle and tramp of the french troops already beginning to move to take
to all the club members and to all the club guests, and finally to
his plight. but simon was no longer there. he was galloping round by the
“you see! i have asked,” whispered natásha to her little brother
“i’m not to blame that the conversation began in the presence of
alike, felt that the commander did not himself know what to do, and this
it were a flail.
doesn’t make a mess of things!”
she added hurriedly. “no, don’t be angry, but promise! i have asked
for the peoples of the west to be able to make their warlike movement
center. our right flank is over there”—he pointed sharply to the right,
human desires. and with this aim, in one of her talks with her father
the calèche in which prince andrew was being taken attracted sónya’s

pierre’s eyes.


produce at the same intervals and hold for the same time, but which
his wife’s room. she was lying dead, in the same position he had seen

had left her kindly and tear-worn face and it now expressed only anxiety
“there, by the wheel!”
“yes, it’s a nice purse. yes, yes,” he said, growing suddenly
pierre felt the different outlooks of these various worlds and made
he had met that evening.
someone to fire at.
by a sense of horror and repulsion such as he had experienced when
position among the petersburg freemasons. he arranged dining and funeral
seat to pull up.

murat approached the interpreter and told him to ask where the russian

himself honored with his visits, regarding hélène as a remarkably
balashëv, the emperor repeated to him the words that he would not make
while the other was warming; and that when he had put on tight dancing
expressed perplexity as to what julie’s smile might mean. in spite of

seven gifts of the holy spirit. brother o. was very eloquent. in the
thousands of bees sitting back to back and guarding the high mystery
“oh! oh!” groaned nesvítski as if in fierce pain, seizing the
something large, brilliant, and handsome moving toward her as she
rather as a joke), a pike and an ax, which latter he used as a wolf uses
galloped to the place whence came the sounds of firing and where the
officer that it was all denísov could do to prevent a duel. when
with the lassitude of age, sat yawning wearily with closed eyes. the
as young people often do. “no, i am too happy now to spoil my
a gentleman in disguise, and who was passing under the arch of the
one morning colonel berg, whom pierre knew as he knew everybody in
his host and hostess. he walked in rapidly, bowing to right and left
dare to, dared not in her present state of mind address herself to god.
there was no one beyond the ditch now. only some carts and carriages
    chapter xxix


understood her,” he thought. “i not only understood her, but it was just
enthusiasms, dreams, and hopes of happiness or goodness, in prince
feelings, but if that were so, he would say for the last time.... but he
but the princess did not listen to him.
her brother often wondered as he looked at her. she did not seem at
with a smile of pleasure, held out her slender, delicate hand to him,
had regarded with surprise and amusement at otrádnoe, was just the
    chapter xi
an instance of a bluestocking being carried away by affairs of the

artificial conversation about trifles as soon as he looked her way.

honest is crushed! everyone sees that this cannot go on. everything is
called her protégée aside.
significance. just then he was only anxious to get away as quickly as

and looked ecstatically at the spot where napoleon had been but where he
to the farther side of the bridge and stopped the infantry. beside the
pierre recalled, counting them on his fingers, he felt already in his
voice; above all he had never seen such delicate whiteness of face or
“well, my dear boy, i hear you’ve been educated abroad, not taught


participation of count rostopchín and his broadsheets. the people


duty. the emperor is gracious, and i shan’t forget you if you deserve
designs the large detachments had on the transport, of the message pétya
having similarly explained his views and his magnanimity to tutólmin, he
the whole interest was concentrated on rostóv. instead of sixteen
house. having repeated her order to dron to have horses ready for her
during their long conversation on wednesday evening, speránski more
returns let us get away... and please don’t...”
was told that his turn would come in due course. after some others had
too well not to detect that (while hiding it from others) at heart
bring her share and a husband his. i have my position in the service,
and he began explaining why he could not put up with his daughter’s
“i know people consider me a bad man!” he said. “let them! i
walked among the crowd with rapid steps, scanning the various faces he
it was only at headquarters that there was depression, uneasiness, and

carried out—we must part; so find some place for yourself....” but
but he even dreaded to recall them and the bright and boundless horizons
have not quitted moscow.”
“why should you be god knows where out of sight, during the battle?” he
of the people of central europe to the movement; the same hesitation
rostóvs requesting them to stand farther back, though as it was they
“oh-h-h! dear souls, dear kind souls! don’t let me die! my good
have the pistol.”
terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms will be linked

symmetrically and above all freely, and in front of them two men—the
to compare his impressions with those of others. they were all looking
being imposed on him which he could not fulfill, and pleased him as an
“what is it?” he asked.


untied the ropes. the body collapsed. the soldiers dragged it awkwardly
i don’t know how to put it. without you, or when something comes between

and down the battery under fire as calmly as if he were on a boulevard,
“father! angel! dear one!” she kept repeating, wiping away her tears
worth, and she was accustomed to this and loved doing it. but in all her
at that moment berg drew out his handkerchief as if to blow his nose

just then a commissariat soldier, a hospital orderly, came in from the

brother a small, oval, antique, dark-faced icon of the saviour in a gold

round márya dmítrievna, now on his toes, now on his heels; until,
someone.”

anyone who wanted to see him could come the hundred miles from moscow to
which produces events. they do not recognize it as a power inherent in
ago have joined the archduke. and believe me on my honour that to me
among them. on my word i’d give five years of my life for it!”
sundays. nobody seemed yet to realize what awaited the city.
during the third night the countess kept very quiet for a few minutes,


my life in falsity? i love her more than anything in the world! but what
shed with pierre, was dying, and pierre told the corporal that something
hadn’t interfered... oh, my god! what is it all? what is it? sónya,
on approaching it, rostóv felt as he had done when approaching his home

“my dear anna mikháylovna,” said he with his usual familiarity and
his groom to get the horses ready and to call him early in the morning,
that is, you want to raise him” (pointing to a peasant who passed by
“he does not look like a common man,” said the interpreter, after a
to a company, and though the french availed themselves of every
the bells of the old prince’s carriage approaching. prince andrew and
an orderly, or a townsman was carried through the waves of infantry;

“how beautiful she is!” natásha remarked to her father who had also

and timidly in the direction of his trap.
“i knew someone who received that sacrament seven times.”
where the clavichord stood.

the ice gave way under one of the foremost soldiers, and one leg slipped
disdainful of everybody and who considered himself above them, was all
chapter xv


was beginning to make plans for marrying one of the richest heiresses in
they drove up to the gloomy old house on the vozdvízhenka and entered
could not spare at such an important moment—to return to him. when
that would astonish people, to perform some patriotically heroic
within a twelvemonth, and then he would go and confess to his wife, and
princess was not unwell, but had such an overpowering fear of the prince
the collar of his coat which, though it was unbuttoned, still seemed
of hers seemed to be the only serious and real society. natásha saw by
“yes, it’s from julie,” replied the princess with a timid glance

but, as he had to say something, he began by asking her whether she was
pineapple ice. before the ices, champagne was served round. the band
from his pocket began asking the officer in how far the road before them
entertaining or amusing in what was going on. his face was sad and
young man. he sat with his legs up on the sofa as if quite at home and,

others.
“don’t laugh, stop!” cried natásha. “you’re shaking the whole

responsibility. these temporary aims are like the broom fixed in front
necessity, to one who knows the circumstances in which these people were
river—and on the right a porch. there were people at the entrance:
matters without looking at the russian general.
me luck!”
them!”
emperor, but to apply to the commander of the corps.... but in general,

victims of the plague.

what struck him was that denísov did not seem glad to see him, and
he did not allow himself either to be hard on or punish a man, or to
hero less on earth.”
“kurágin is exquisite when he discusses politics—you should see his


“tell me about that!” he said.
“onterkoff,” said the captain and looked at pierre for some seconds with
he hired the first cab he met and told the driver to go to the
hard as it was for sónya, she watched her friend and did not let her

legs and turned-out toes, climbed the hill with difficulty.) prince

kept looking round toward the drawing room door. it opened and nicholas
i devoted myself to him! so there! oh yes, mon cher, he is the greatest
out of the room. “uncle” continued to play correctly, carefully,
after a while “uncle” came in, in a cossack coat, blue trousers, and
never be known to anyone. believe me,” he went on, “if things

officer, who thrust his head out of the door, that warlike feeling of
“no, my dear boy” (the count, too, felt embarrassed. he knew he had
strictly to obey. you said the bridge would be burned, but who would it
officer.

more manly, lost his former affectation, pride, and contemptuous irony,
impossible to stop him, she rallied her forces and joined the vicomte in

petersburg society anxious and uneasy, a terrible piece of news was
fate, her father-in-law, and her husband. after crying she had fallen
lovingly suffered for mankind though he himself was god. what had she to
weakness which assailed him at this touching recollection.
“to petersburg!” she repeated as if unable to understand.
kronq,—chargé d’affaires from copenhagen—a profound intellect,”
sónya. she valued the company of those to whom she could come striding

first child who was delicate, when they had to change the wet nurse

souls, their eternal souls, for the attainment of benefits which endure
not write, because she could not conceive the possibility of expressing
at natásha. the curtain had not yet risen and the overture was being
window.
me that you would not abandon moscow without another battle; all this
“peace has been concluded...” he began.
her spirituality and at the lofty moral world, almost beyond his reach,
at http://pglaf.org


the vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingness to
bolkónski, who seemed to her to have grown much younger, happier, and
shower shells on the russian flèches and redoubts. this could not be

dismal appearance with its broken roofs and fences, its foul streets,
men, one of whom he knew. after greeting pierre they continued their

sight. i suffer for my own sins,’ and he wept bitter tears. well,
each ascent or descent of the road the crowds were yet denser and the
mot d’ordre be not virtue alone but independence and action as well!”
hopes to bring upon us recoil on his own head, and may europe delivered
guards. prince andrew came up to him and took his hand.
obstinacy—as you please—is still as great, marry! and that’s my
man in a white hat were seen coming toward the officers.
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if the second copy
river, all began to sparkle in the glad light—pierre felt a new joy and
of its rightful king,” she concluded, trying to be amiable to the

and, as you know my principles, i refer it to you.”

instant of delay might cost him his life; but he did not know what
much as a sailor is by his ship. however far he has walked, whatever
described, where he is reported to have been prepared to accept battle
“one word, just one, for god’s sake!” cried anatole.
possessed him. the whole meaning of life—not for him alone but for the
before the wind. it was growing lighter and lighter. that curly grass
“what? what? how dare you? what?” said telyánin.
emperor would give another division.
as he said this. she seemed to be trying to fathom the hidden meaning of



from hollabrünn) received murat’s dispatch with the proposal of a
emperor quickly, his face suddenly flushing.
the greatest crush during the movement of the troops took place at the
being punished for my own and other men’s sins. but i have not killed

forget. but, my dear, will you not give us a little hope of touching
wish nothing but to relive it all from the beginning.”
severely, saying that he ought to be shot. general bagovút, a fighting
“yes, you know between cousins intimacy often leads to love. le

three officers of denísov’s band were converting a door into a tabletop.

said the valet.

“which is he? which?” asked pétya in a tearful voice, of those around
kept going, and in this consciousness of being indispensable every
of the french army along the smolénsk road became well defined, what
after the battle of borodinó the abandonment and burning of moscow was
of love which pervaded the rostóv household that winter and, now after

prince andrew was one of those rare staff officers whose chief interest

the more i jest and the calmer i am the more tranquil and confident you
fighting cocks preparing for battle, each vainly trying to detect signs
she was as he had known her almost as a child and later on as prince

nothing to repent of, and andrew can love me still. but why ‘still?’
natásha was sixteen and it was the year 1809, the very year to which

trailed twisting along the ground. the crowd shrank back from it.
as he liked, now in petersburg i hear he has been doing such terrible
bottom of his heart he had felt that relief from his despair and from
crows flying from moscow across the field, and when afterwards light
hurt the back of his head; then when they propped him against the
commander in chief the buzz of talk ceased and all eyes were fixed on


all historians agree that the external activity of states and nations
exclaimed in excellent french.

pretext. the fact is he has come to see count cyril vladímirovich,
physician to the queen of spain.”
he had long been convinced that it was impossible for him to make a
he pointed with a smile to a turreted nunnery, and his eyes narrowed and
said the officer, addressing the esaul while denísov was reading the
“nesvítski, nesvítski! you numskull!” came a hoarse voice from
“he was taken today but he knows nothing. i’m keeping him with me.”
is, as he chose, it is evident that one single free act of that man’s
quilt for his shoulders, she imagined a horrible body there, and stood


next day, the army began its campaign, and up to the very battle of

smile, and engaged the smiling julie in a confidential conversation
    chapter iv
they too could, like natásha and borís, escape from the drawing room.
the combatants advanced along the trodden tracks, nearer and nearer to
father, count bezúkhov, and showed them her own box. princess hélène
recalled all this as childishness he had left immeasurably behind.

and sentiments of various generals, and not the history of the events.
knowing how. first he spun her round, holding her now with his left, now
this same irresolute and undiscerning dokhtúrov—kutúzov hastening to
in the crowd could be heard saying. “quite a young fellow too... must
of her sons under her wing, and she hoped to arrange matters for her
moment those hands with their short reddish fingers and hairy wrists,
bilíbin attentively examined his nails, and many of those present

grown furious, now at borís, now at bolkónski. “yes, many stories!

answer to the question were contained in his name, his nationality would

words serving as their expression are not what move people—use quite



value this mystic power and glory that is floating here above me in this
any company he was in.
prince andrew stood right in front of kutúzov but the expression of
look of sincere penitence, and prince andrew glanced so meekly now at

him. the pain in his arm became more and more intense. irresistible
the stupid smile, which had left his face while he was speaking,
“come! balagá is here.”
drums, he recognized that mysterious, callous force which compelled
majesty’s and you were pitied....”

stronger and added a touch of passionate tenderness. besides this

i was praying. don’t you pray?”
“well, everything is going to ruin! robbery in the law courts, in the
face, already growing old, though he was dressed like a most fashionable
to say and as if she were saying it to someone else, with whom joking


ground, and he fell upon eýkhen, threatening him with his hands,
acquaintance has left, but as seldom happens, no one said anything but
still sat softly running his fingers over the strings, evidently
young man can inspire in a romantic and loving young girl like yourself.
they’re fighting.”
“devil take ‘em!” he muttered, while his head was still covered by

“shall i join the army and enter the service, or wait?” he asked himself
walk. that morning she had returned to her favorite mood—love of,
desires the ruin of us all. so i write you frankly: call out the

his first impulse stepped instantly and rapidly toward the coach. but

with a supple movement, got up, coughed, and went off to another part of
symptoms of the approach of the end.
to balance himself. one of the footmen who had stooped to pick up some
reason to capture a king or a duke—it seemed that now—when any battle



completely altered. he was not rich, but would spend his last groat to
chapter xii

prince andrew remained at bald hills as usual during his father’s

remember nikólenka too, i remember him well,” she said. “but i
a plain farmer: he did not like innovations, especially the english ones
concentration of fighting at one point, and the hesitation of all the
facts and the historical accounts only arises because the historians

having rolled like a ball in the direction of the impetus given by the
the first words he heard on coming to his senses were those of a french
had the air of a man happily performing one of the most solemn duties of
“it’s awful! oh, it’s awful! awful!” natásha suddenly cried,
own life, for she was accustomed to seek other joys, but she understood
the little princess, taking the dress from the maid, came up to princess
chapter xix
dólokhov slowly straightened his bent knee, looking straight with his
of the river, and for a long time did not notice the killed and wounded,
consolation for our defeat by the memory of former victories; and the
companion was found robbed and with his throat cut. a bloodstained knife
*** start: full license ***
    chapter viii
meekness, love, and self-sacrifice—all this now shone in those radiant
the higher laws.
confess everything, and intercepting the note to natásha she read it and

marshal had been found in his possession.
putting them down. when they’ve been put down, the war with buonaparte
and after a short pause he added: “and i behaved badly today. you
napoleon sat on a campstool, wrapped in thought.
how they keep asking me, and i’m glad of it, i’m happy and i love
came to him and, after talking a great deal about his exploits,
“again, again!” interrupted natásha.

boots. then he took off his nightcap, combed his hair over his temples,


receive a lasting reward for his virtue. but in these great endeavors we
army’s foraging operations, provision trains, and hospitals. when—free
one plan, armfeldt another, and they are all good and all bad, and the
with exasperation, symptoms of a growing attachment between her son and
after the junction with the army of the brilliant admiral and petersburg
other lady visitors were farther down. at the other end sat the count,
body, the direction of its motion cannot coincide with any one of those
“marie” produced on the visitors. and she saw mademoiselle
flourishing his arm, called him to enter.
much indeed,” he said, looking at her significantly. “you’ll come
wrinkled; he waved his arm at toll and turned to the opposite side of

“england is done for,” said he, scowling and pointing his finger
been dug. within the entrenchment stood ten guns that were being fired


of the men like a child.

and not in the habit of running, trotted awkwardly stumbling on his
advice to seek. had my benefactor been here he would have told me what



the rostóvs.
young footman and courier her aunt had sent to accompany her.

“zakhár is shouting that i should turn to the left, but why to the
“just look! see what it’s doing now. o lord! you can even see the crows

nicholas lowered his legs, rose, and took his daughter in his arms.
from the crowd around, and at the same moment a mounted patrol of french
occurred, princess mary and natásha were present.
deep breath, as a man does at the coming of something long hoped for.
sokólniki forest and found dólokhov, denísov, and rostóv already

with reference to diplomacy, all napoleon’s arguments as to his

ideas that occupied him.
fertile woman. the old fire very rarely kindled in her face now. that
thinking they were escaping ran right into the russians.
part in the activity to devise considerations, justifications, and
courts only strengthened his desire to belong to that higher world.
their misfortunes. these are the measures the government has adopted to
pale and his jaw trembled, shivering feverishly. he was placed on

this conception is the one handle by means of which the material of
during rostóv’s short stay in moscow, before rejoining the army, he

therefore better to disregard what is painful till it comes, and to

on the evening of the twenty-fourth of june, count zhilínski arranged a
an intimacy with a young foreign prince. when she returned to petersburg
berg was sitting beside the countess consoling her with the respectful
tried to conceal them.
written it yourself?’ said he, and he took up the hamburg gazette that

rostóv could already see their faces and heard the command:
highest aristocracy, to an ambassador’s ball he had attended, and to

perform toward them the duties demanded of him. and nicholas’ management
you yourself are left facing that abyss, and look in. and i have looked
every russian might have predicted it, not by reasoning but by the
a few days previously pierre had decided to go to petersburg on the
to the front of the regiment and examined it from a distance.
“if she goes to her cousin first and then to another lady, she will be
denísov were his worst enemy, firmly fixed his eyes directly on his
the mist, and his cold face wore that special look of confident,
useless, everything is being accomplished of itself better than we could
side and looked round with a frown. along the road from pratzen galloped
increased tenfold, and their life, which seemed to have been passed in

every moment of the life of kings as a tool for its own purposes.
for your neighbor? have you ever thought of your tens of thousands
“what does she want?” he murmured. “she is bringing me my daughter whom
    chapter xix
face and narrow little eyes beamed with self-satisfied merriment. he
anatole returned smiling to the ladies.

restrain the russian army from useless engagements.
     * (2) “of a charming woman, as witty as she is lovely.”
     * “the principle of monarchies is honor seems to me
his shoulders.

growled at everybody because he thought he was being pushed and that


pleasure and listened to the conversation of his two neighbors, whom he
quartermaster’s presence.

paper. he looked gloomily in rostóv’s face and said: “i am witing

while we, on the other hand, with our left wing by far outflank his
“i know that man,” he said in a cold, measured tone, evidently
pushing back his chair, he rose from the table.

chairs and invited her to go with them. she sat down and played with
and virtue, and thereby try with all our might to combat the evil which
“he was gray, you remember, and had white teeth, and stood and looked
at dorogobúzh while the soldiers of the convoy, after locking the
“a bit touched—i always said so.”
borís, grown more manly and looking fresh, rosy and self-possessed,
years’ time, when everything would be made free and so “simple” that
“hasn’t been in since the evening. must have been losing,”

than never” and heard them repeated several times by others, people
you say so much that is bad, does not seem to have had its usual effect
dessalles; the rest of the day she spent over her books, with her old


from the bottom of the slope, where the parleys had taken place, came
strength of character and resignation,” remarked borís, joining in
me. and tears came into my eyes, and i was glad he noticed this. but he
was evidently a german) patiently awaited the end of the service, which
man with a broad, light-brown beard and black eyes. the fifth was a
festive around him. nearer and nearer to rostóv came that sun shedding
losing our own men and inhumanly slaughtering unfortunate wretches? what
acquired though she did not understand its significance. this expression
at close quarters as at a distance, sat down beside her and told her he

did not cease chattering good-naturedly and gaily, continually praising
laughing loudly. in the middle of the room a short handsome general with
him full directions which he had written down for his own guidance as to
“all the same, i love and value nothing but triumph over them all, i

bolkónski, wishing to profit by his friendliness and obtain for himself
of the regiment and felt himself deprived of liberty and bound in one
him or her to a little old lady, wearing large bows of ribbon in her
“now i see it all! i know who has been intriguing—i know!” cried


discover personal attributes which he termed “good qualities” in people
kutúzov to the emperor. “i can neither punish him if he does wrong nor

he lifted a glass of wine.
“ah, how bitter it is to love someone near to you and to feel
progress. would you believe it, i have literally not a penny and don’t

laughed.

“don’t say that to me! i want nothing. i love you as a brother and
indispensable because they satisfied a mental need of the invalid and
bagratión ordered two battalions from the center to be sent to
kutúzov never talked of “forty centuries looking down from the
when there was a war, like this one, it would be war! and then the
“you see,” he suddenly said, “i am a kinsman of the count’s and he has
in both cases his personal activity, having no more force than the
“and how i pity her mother,” she went on; “today she showed me her
feet, their cries, and their spontaneous laughter. they laughed and were
direct retreat on nízhni-nóvgorod. the army turned more to the south,
cynically dólokhov had praised his wife’s beauty to him and from that

round the whole position.”
appear to know it.
after them, and all four, looking round at the carriage, ran in dismay

her—thou or you?”
how can i, an insignificant mortal, show his omnipotence, his infinity,

me—denísov and natásha... natásha is absurd. how she rules over him! and
minutes to eight, please. we shall make up a rubber. our general is
after all impossible to express all one thinks; and that he had never
eating and talking among themselves, taking no notice of him.
than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
assumed a dignified expression, which with characteristic tact she had
prince andrew left the rostóvs’ late in the evening. he went to bed
said she, repeating words pierre had once uttered.
him, returned to his place and sat down. in his hands he had something
nicholas dismounted, and with natásha and pétya, who had ridden up,
truth, too remote from everything human, for him ever to be able to
man. either this look meant nothing but that as long as one has eyes
can tell whether i saw anything or not?” flashed through sónya’s
did you come here?”
    * “on vous fera danser.”
emperor was invited to act as hostess. count bennigsen, being a
about it; they spoke of their last meeting—nicholas trying to change the
princess mary nodded her head, weeping.
“aline,” he said to his wife, “go and see what they are about.”
you to?” shouted natásha, raising herself on the sofa and looking
“how’s your wound?”
must take the same terrible step.
ashamed as she was of acknowledging to herself that she had fallen in

which the doctors recommended long ago. i hope it will cure him. you
dancer, and one of the best matches in the city.

“that’s always the way,” thought countess mary. “he talks to everyone
without replying either to his wife or his mother-in-law, pierre late
the stores are empty, the roads impassable. the orthodox begin looting,
which heaved with convulsive sobs.

would be ordered. but she drove these thoughts away with disgust. toward
had no hair on his head and his features were quite changed. and i said,
a coward, dense, dilatory, and has all bad qualities. the whole army

who were guiding him, he was not only doing nothing wrong, but was doing
immediately vanished and were replaced by eager excitement. he quickly
card game he was very fond of, was that of listener, especially when he

denísov.
a look at you, your excellency.”
ourselves, dear prince,” said the little princess (of course, in

to be present, were still hurrying to get dressed.
“is he in moscow?” pierre stammered with a guilty look.
mean to fight, let’s fight. but the devil knows what this is.”
they were not christians, but they too have souls. it’s what the old
time, and nothing can be done now!” he replied to someone else.
and artillerymen’s bonfires. to the left, not far from the farthest

dandling him. a blissful bright smile was fixed on the baby’s broad face
stand the sight of these unfortunates.
specially choice delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had seen it in
longer and went on, between gasps of laughter: “and the whole world

he had in the highest degree a practical tenacity which pierre lacked,
invisible power at any moment to take her and deliver her from herself,
and he narrated his whole conversation with the french doctor and
napoleon was in that well-known after-dinner mood which, more than
rostopchín’s orders to burn the barges and had in connection with that
cry. prince andrew evidently felt ill at ease, but to the two women
chapter viii


princess mary could not lift her head, she was weeping.

returned to moscow and went straight to her rich relations, the
one and the same time. this simultaneous discussion of many topics did
had very important results for him, it seemed to him—as it seems to



happening. we kept wetweating and wetweating. did you take part in the
chasseur regiment and in the lines of the kiev grenadiers—fine fellows
angrier at having blushed, and looked at the princess with a bold and

to prince andrew.
on the way to his sister’s room, in the passage which connected one
    chapter vii
watchman’s hut or it might be a cavern leading to the very depths of
“yes, and nothing more,” said natásha.
have one, i will pay the man well, and...”
“women,” he said in a low, scarcely audible voice.
“attendez,” said anna pávlovna, reflecting, “i’ll speak to


continued, “and about your freed plowmen.”
“oh, no,” agreed the other.
self-knowledge and self-perfecting. besides this he advised me for

straight! it’s well god had mercy on us. and what was it for? who
bazdéev’s widow had called to ask pierre to take charge of her husband’s
did this and that, all would be well; and he did what was demanded of
said, holding the casement and not closing it. “with lanterns. most
receives them.”
owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation (and


officers with whom he was talking.
stand?... you know, count, there’ll be a battle tomorrow. out of an army
equal halves on the palm of his hand, sprinkled some salt on it from the
white daylight of his clear perception of death. “there they are, those

wishing to show her connections and knowledge of what went on in

freedom and entirely subject to the law of inevitability.
subordinate by me.
the doctor advised him to apply direct to kutúzov.

“what would you have me do?” he said at last. “you know i did all

and high boots, at an open desk on which lay an abacus and some bundles

frightened the beast, and it rushed forward onto the hunter’s gun,

significance for them of the glow they were watching. sighs were heard,
cautiously descended the carriage steps which were let down for them
after rain, and the air was unusually pure. the smoke did not hang low

he would rush through the whole suite of rooms without drawing breath,

pierre’s eyes with it and tied it in a knot behind, catching some
doing this or that action; but as soon as he has done it, that action
officer joined in the colonel’s appeals, but bagratión did not reply;
could not reply.
brave officer,” thought bagratión. prince andrew, without replying,
them, and considers no one among you his enemy except those who disobey

mustache he had grown, moving his fingers slowly. his eyes gazed at them
landowner, fourteen miles away, who had the stud. everything seemed to
some reason everyone called “the king of rome.”
“but how get married?” said pierre, in answer to márya dmítrievna. “he
“oh, how strange you are with that mustache and those eyebrows!...
“i shall not be at peace till you promise me this.”
meanwhile had pounced on.
one of the ápsheron regiment went forward past the emperor.
“uncle” played another song and a valse; then after a pause he
shade of the nearest house, on a bench which one cossack had run

to have two estates in pénza and the nizhegórod forests). anna

“what decision have you been pleased to come to?” said he.
ratify it; but it is only a trick. march on, destroy the russian
“thanks, thanks, old fellow.... but the bits left over?” said the
if the man whose actions we are considering is on a very low stage of

copies of which the countess corrected her mistakes in spelling.
    chapter iv
if in reply to it, came the sound of guns ahead of them.
who came to congratulate, and who constantly succeeded one another in
everything and everybody at last and had spoken such pathetic words to

“sire, i expected nothing less than to find you at the gates of moscow,”

but without proper feeling. brother urúsov came and we talked about


readiness for relentless hatred in case of such refusal.
only when the victim ceased to struggle and his cries changed to a
an immediate answer. prince vasíli had brought his son with the evident
and seeing her severe face said: “well, good-by, countess,” and
“uncle’s” offer was accepted. a huntsman was sent to otrádnoe for


face.
anything, but was only conscious of her stern father’s withered face
sun were reflected, flashing back like lightning from the water, from
was bright, he had a good horse under him, and his heart was full of
hindrance on their return journey. (5) steps will immediately be taken


carriage drove out of the house, he mounted and accompanied her eight
for me to bear.... excuse me, good-by!” and suddenly she began to cry
been told to, and the emperor francis merely looked fixedly into his
    chapter xxii

struck two and another with a shrill tone joined in from the drawing
him what consolation i can.”
and therefore in the way that always produces the most powerful results.
the question was no longer whether this was possible, but only which was
reality again presented itself. he got up without saying a word and went
“go, go to him. he is asking for your hand,” said the countess,
soiree.
well yet and still weak, went to moscow with pétya and the rest of the
the other, still more reasonably, says that it is too depressing and
to help with the harvest or to dig ponds, and ditches, but he disliked
man who has been suffering innocently and in vain? a paper has come from
it especially from the list of prisoners the french officer had read out


among the children, in the special sense they attached to it.) “why
barrel.”
to hang, were as little voluntary as the actions of any soldier who was
“you know her husband, of course?” said anna pávlovna, closing her
sister,” was all she said, in a dry and mournful tone.
“i had the pleasure,” replied prince andrew, “not only of taking part in

amid the square masses of troops standing motionless as if turned to
he went blind. and he dreamed that the holy virgin mother of the kiev
behind some trees on the right and saw a group of girls running to cross

“are you mad? you have twice been ordered to retreat, and you...”

ladies and all these civilities!” said he aloud in sónya’s presence,
mary hendríkhovna was the wife of the regimental doctor, a pretty young

the moaning, the distant cries, and the crackle of fires which seemed
“just look at the master! a regular eagle he is!” loudly remarked
after his interview with pierre in moscow, prince andrew went to

there is only one thing left—to go away, but where could i go?”
at six in the evening, kutúzov went to the emperor’s headquarters
tíkhon to ask mary bogdánovna what news.—“say only that ‘the
moment?” thought princess mary. “and that caused his sister to refuse my
and am able to show my readiness to serve you,” said rostóv, rising. “go

    chapter xxi
for three months. he had what the doctors termed “bilious fever.” but
“well, the lord have mercy on us!” said the count, half in jest,
seems as much alive as other hives.
possible what kutúzov had not yet even dared to think of—the complete
she caught the young officer by his cuffs, and a look of solemnity and
“if you allow yourself in my drawing room...” whispered hélène, but
what was being said by one or other of these groups he generally turned
it. he gave orders to investigate the matter. gabriel ivánovich
“but what are ‘god’s folk’?” asked pierre.
follows:
trying to prove by physiology and comparative zoology was not merely

water that was leaking in under their seats, their knees, and at the

a man having no freedom cannot be conceived of except as deprived of
inability to enter a room and converse in it was, however, redeemed by
the governor’s wife pressed his elbow gratefully.
had been cut short. “she’s ridden all day like a man, and is as
“yes, and some wine,” answered the captain.



says plainly: i am free and am therefore not subject to the law.
that i’m a sharper, so i advise you to be careful.”
influenced the whole army and directed it along the mozháysk (that is,
and she smiled her ecstatic smile.
seeing three yards under a man is considered an attribute of wizards.
a courier who galloped to the castle in advance, in a troyka with three





evidently taking a bad turn. every day, letters of inquiry and notices
“one should make up to the husbands of pretty women,” said denísov.
dead. all that he saw and heard seemed to confirm this terror.
arrangements of the house, he interrupted himself:
as if to ascertain whether his father’s habits had changed since he
horrors that occurred did not stagger his soul. he boldly took the
knew and who had a strap round the calf of one leg, crossed himself,
despite his seniority in rank bagratión, in this contest of magnanimity,
said nicholas. “yes, pierre always was a dreamer and always will be,”
human skull with its cavities and teeth. after reading the first words
soon as possible.
“it’s the steam that spoils them,” he added, stretching out his feet
as a mother. as it is, not only has she left us, and particularly prince
“and why didn’t you simply come straight to me as to a friend? i
reprehensible, looked round with a blush. it seemed to him that everyone
the blood that rushed to his heart at the thought. “i will fall at
the troops of the vanguard were stationed before wischau, within sight
wife, sister, and future son, and the tenderness he had felt the night
his father with frightened eyes, but did not cry, because no one else
chapter v
son, sat at the table writing. he glanced round.
did indicated his unusual position. but dólokhov, who in moscow had worn

she was much altered. she was now plain rather than pretty. her cheeks
conferring together anxiously and privately and heard suggestions of

michael ivánovich went up to the plan, and the prince after speaking to
stop, stop!” she cried to the coachman.

general engagement in which he was taking part, more than that, he was

particularly kindly attention. “yes, i heard,” said he sympathetically,
“mamma, i don’t at all want to,” replied natásha, but all the
“a fine little bitch, that!” said he in a careless tone. “is she

reception hall: michael ivánovich, mademoiselle bourienne, princess
“good news!... go on!” he shouted to the driver, and they galloped
clouds of dust they raised and making the air ring with a deafening roar
his side pocket a well-filled notebook, which he asked permission to
he was somewhat flushed with the wine and the drive. his eyes were
before, when i had a nap and told bennigsen to issue orders? or was it
i take little másha into society? perhaps they will be fashionable again



down to her neck and shoulders while nicholas was speaking.

shouted something breathlessly with emphatic intonations and gestures.
guilty. but hélène, like a really great man who can do whatever
guards, that they not only did not wish to, but simply could not, be
evidently not because he was shaven but because they had never grown.


not heard his remark. but as soon as she had turned away she felt that
(he had probably soiled them when he, too, had knelt before the icon),
to rumors, knew how apt people who desire anything are to group all news

ranks; anatole was in the army somewhere in the provinces; prince andrew
poor amélie’s happiness, she loves him so passionately, and so
a wounded french general, whom the officers surrounded. crowds of
so truly discern the importance of the people’s view of the events that
his three roans and dozhoyvéyko, his quartermaster, and to wonder
“well, you know whom,” said pierre, with a meaning glance from under
so softly that the rhetor did not hear him and asked him what he was
it was late in the evening when they entered the palace at olmütz
“what is it you have got into your heads, eh?... what are you thinking
here made the inquiries. the proclamation had passed through exactly
immense number of bodies splashing about in the dirty pond.
on a few steps he stopped before prince andrew, who lay on his back with
day.
houses, were in uniform—some in that of catherine’s day, others in that

“you’re not the same at all,” he said.
any step. had his wife come to him, he would not have turned her away.
kutúzov looked long and intently at these two soldiers. he puckered his
cochon he had found in the kitchen. but as the captain had the wine they

told so (on the contrary their superior officers, and napoleon himself,
“now, sónya!” she said, going to the very middle of the room, where

to give further orders for the sake of killing time, for the orders had
nicholas, having as usual exhausted two pairs of horses, without
world a quite different atmosphere, careless, lighthearted, and
she approached him, saw his face, and something gave way within her. her
“no prisoners!” said he, repeating the aide-de-camp’s words. “they
“tproo! get out of the way! hi!... tproo!...” the shouting of balagá
all that strange contradiction now difficult to understand between the
emperor’s horse, and the faint creak of a footstep rostóv knew at
in human beings in space, in time, and in dependence on cause forms
bowed his head in sign of assent and approval. he rode off at a walk to
some five male domestic serfs, big and little, rushed out to the front

moscow society. for a long time he could not reconcile himself to the

battery still with that same smile, trying not to obstruct the soldiers
but he did not explain to himself what these new relations were.
smiling, glittered with effort and exasperation as he mustered his
he mentioned what he had written to an old field marshal, a friend

pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbé as tutor,
sónya went up to the countess and, kneeling down, kissed her hand.

the aim of cutting off napoleon and his army never existed except in
when we know what is needed!” said he, trying to be heard above the
eager questions from all sides. the whole moving mass began pressing

purposely dropped a handkerchief in front of him and stood looking

attention to it. he did not know that it would become more memorable to
victory. his majesty will no doubt wish to see you, but not today. i

the countess’ face flushed hotly, but she said nothing.
architect’s attention to the sound of the prince’s footsteps.


sufficient ground for this affair, or for blood to be shed over it....
bottles of wine with him and, despite the jolting ruts across the
was all he thought about yesterday’s ball, and after his morning tea
that was usually in a bad temper) lost control of himself. another

fabvier’s account, as if he had not expected that matters could go

the krémlin, but called on his friend obolénski, who was fifteen and was


listen to an angry reprimand for not having provided his full quota of
wanted a more distinguished and wealthier match for andrew. and they
take the landlord’s grain,” said a voice at the back of the crowd.
hostility but yet with respect, in the guardhouse to which he was taken.
kept turning his horse in front of the squadron.
reached him, turned back, and finally—like any wild beast—ran back along
from all sides reports reach me,” etc.
gratefully, she let him see the hidden, kindly sides of her character.


“what, outside our line?”
artillery company, a head and shoulders taller and twice as broad
carts would not be forthcoming.



avenged, that his rancor was still unspent, weighed on his heart and


condemn dreamers; now that of a satirist, and laugh ironically at his
and he looks a regular buffoon!”

since early morning—despite an injunction not to approach the picket
other women, and that now, especially after having seen many women in
confirmed by pierre’s rupture with his wife, was the talk of society.
wreaths of black smoke rolled from under the roof. there was another
he scattered the burning tobacco, smashed the pipe, and threw it away.

ground ten paces apart to mark the barrier. it was thawing and misty; at
a subject near to her own heart, she could not reconcile herself to the
he looked with disdain at the endless confused mass of detachments,
boguchárovo, a homestead had been looted by french marauders.
gone. having got warm in his corner, he fell asleep and did not leave

especially commercial redistribution.

pierre took off his coat, waistcoat, and left boot according to the
the ranks of obscure officers and offer him the first step to fame!

happiness), feeling the eager bustle around him, and hearing the fitful


“your honor, your honor! a courier.”
“yes, yes,” assented pierre.
down before the altar to which she was led. the enchanting, middle-aged
always better to “bow too low than not bow low enough.” so the
submitted herself to mademoiselle bourienne and lise. both these women
day.
mack. an austrian general complained of me. i congratulated him on

takes after his father. and he’s hand in glove with speránski,

pierre was looking into princess mary’s eyes.
poor, dark-eyed niece of hers was so meek, so kind, so devotedly
that the various operations necessary to free her from her husband
“i recognize you only too well, too well.”
soldier shouted to him. “they’d kill you there!”
naïve a question. “will he agree?”
before the battle of borodinó our strength in proportion to the french


had no time. he was afraid of falling behind the hussars, so much afraid
dying and was already half dead. he was conscious of an aloofness from
“so you say ideas are an amusement to him....”
at last the emperor left the army, and as the most convenient and indeed
a paper from his writing table. “here!” and he handed it to prince
don’t need it? now you shall judge between us. i always tell him: here

dry.”
other people who simply found it preferable and more advantageous to
and down the room. he understood what she was weeping about, but could

fish for this dinner. the count had been a member and on the committee
he noticed this hesitation in dron’s look and therefore frowned and

the movement of history, we see that every year and with each new
    chapter xxiii
with a solemn triumphal march there mingled a song, the drip from the

rostóvs and spent the rest of the day there.
“no!” he suddenly said to berthier. “i can’t send claparède. send
was putting up there, but just when pierre arrived he was not in and

of that song.
he listened and heard the sound of approaching horses, and voices
velvety softness, which so mingled with her lack of art in singing that

fell on the snow and on the path. this path led to the barn. the log
at one another, and all pressed toward the exit from the bridge.
account. and during the two days of the young man’s visit he was
her half her life. when the news of pétya’s death had come she had been
that pleasure because he was already under the command of the polish
debts. and pierre decided that the steward’s proposals which had so
natásha. but he was not as much at ease with sónya and dólokhov as
“what brings you here?” cried the officers turning to the newcomer.
“i have begun giving the elder ones marks every evening, showing how
“lord god of might, god of our salvation! look this day in mercy and
for it. the one thing that recalled the patriotic fervor everyone had

yells and swayed about him, rostopchín suddenly turned pale and, instead
with the bachelor sets, leading such a life that the countess hélène

remained with the army to keep the commander in chief under observation
pierre smiled absent-mindedly, evidently not grasping what she said.
his noble soul peacefully to leave this...”
ran up to sónya, scrutinized her, and then ran to her mother. turning


that so agitated society—abolishing court ranks and introducing

the porch?”
the older men, who thought it undignified to amuse themselves with such
“but it isn’t?...”
the table, searched everywhere, and stood still in the middle of the
genius.
“may i call in that boy who was taken prisoner and give him something to

something toward it and you cannot persuade me that it was not a good
gesture. anna pávlovna meditated.
princess mary was still standing by the cot, gently rocking the baby.
irritability.
and the soldier, pushing away a little dog that was jumping up at
natásha laughed, and the countess too smiled slightly.
for the peasants of the district burned their hay rather than let the
pierre and thirteen others were moved to the coach house of a merchant’s
expressions with the choicest french phrases—which was a peculiarity



“ah, my love,” answered anna mikháylovna, “god grant you never
is one of the stupidest women in the world,” thought pierre, “is
denísov’s horse swerved aside to avoid a pool in the track and bumped
line—the officers had been unable to keep sight-seers away. the
princess mary’s heart beat so violently at this news that she grew pale
combination of incongruities giving the chief charm to the feeling.
but the attention of the crowd—officials, burghers, shopkeepers,
on the day the count left, sónya and natásha were invited to a big
habit of walking, had been swept: the marks of the broom were still

hand and hid with her behind a birch tree, not stopping to pick up some
radiantly on her beautiful face. pierre gazed at her with rapturous,
“but nothing more would come of it. there will soon be a battalion of
herself: a coarse smock, bast shoes, a rough coat, and a black kerchief.
like all the others near the speaker, prince andrew looked at him with
on!” he continued without looking at pierre.
but her voice was drowned by the voices of the crowd.
chapter ii
“three days?” said natásha. “it seems to me i’ve loved him a
of capacity for philosophical meditation (to which he himself was
word “waiting.”) “not all the columns have formed up yet, your
northerly or more southerly route (say by the road kutúzov afterwards
chapter xiii
acquaintance with the polish landowners, preparing for reviews and being

to seek or plan anything, that his rut had long been shaped, eternally
on the thirteenth of june the french and russian emperors arrived in
“if he is better, ask pierre to dine with us. he has been to the
the moment nicholas took her hand she could no longer restrain herself
“what officers? whom have they brought? i don’t understand anything
berg took the opportunity to ask, with great politeness, whether, as was
pierre saw that borís wished to change the subject, and being of the
end of the shed. “so you’ve come, you rascal? she remembers... now, now,

“you are a cossack?”
room.
surprised at the surprise expressed by those who had never understood
a result of this, he galloped up to the wolf just when she had been
of antiquity had been performed by general raévski. he recounted how
brotherly tenderness, almost lover-like.
of hair sticking up behind and the hastily brushed hair on his temples

has been degraded, you know. now he wants to bob up again. he’s been
“then she is here still?” said prince andrew. “and prince kurágin?” he

“yes, if it only were so!” said prince andrew. “however, it is
particles of drizzling mist. the bare twigs in the garden were hung with
a circle soon formed round speránski, and the old man who had talked
guards with the rank of cornet. he received, however, no appointment
     * “indeed, sire, we shall do everything it is possible to
“and you?” he asked dólokhov, but as soon as he had asked the
meanwhile an agitated consultation was being carried on in whispers


family life continually rose in her imagination. she drove them away and
“andrew sevastyánych!” said rostóv. “you know, we could crush them....”
cannon balls and slow whistling shells flew unceasingly. at times, as

he wanted to know what natásha thought of it.
to poland, forming the holy alliance, entrusting power to arakchéev,
command of the third district, and my only way of avoiding active


the battlefield.
pierre was silent.
her face to the window, looked out in such a way that it was evident

peasant sees the devil in the locomotive; others as a force resulting
bilíbin introduced him to the others.
reached bagratión, the weighty tread of the mass of men marching in
rags, with pale cheeks, compressed lips, and knitted brows, held on to
if he were a king! all the same, the french are charming, very charming.
“something absurd will come of it.”... prince andrew did not catch
of the french embassy and by many belonging to that circle and noted for

the twenty-sixth the battle of borodinó itself took place.
souls!...”
wrists visible from under the shirt cuffs, laid down the pack and took
distress at the dead body with its long, thin, half-severed neck and its

heard musket fire quite close in front of him and behind our troops,
more men collected behind the wattle fence of the eighth company than
war has deprived me of one of the associations nearest my heart. i mean


speránski smiled and said he could not judge of the advantage or

loading.
sónya was sitting at the clavichord, playing the prelude to
and refined expression on the faces of those present he was always
it were not his. he examined his hand carefully, vainly trying to find
of shoes) and listening to the regular tap of the heel and creak of
evidently natásha needed to tell that painful yet joyful tale.



for these simple, kindly people.
at krásnoe they took twenty-six thousand prisoners, several hundred
smolénsk. fortune is frankly a courtesan, rapp. i have always said so
next day nicholas took his mother’s letter and went to see princess

had an opportunity of getting a good look at him, for pfuel arrived soon
such a friend that i burned my arm for her sake. look here!”
about paris and about some changes he meant to make in the empress’
“‘i most ardently desire,’ writes the king of prussia to
bolkónski, who spoke with suppressed agitation.
his daughter, princess hélène, passed between the chairs, lightly
from an unfinished house on the varvárka, the ground floor of which was

forever and there came into being something nondescript, neither
“and, if your excellency will allow me to express my opinion,” he
raising his eyebrows.
else.
for a long time that night princess mary sat by the open window of her
to suggest that russia had saved europe) “do any harm? the tugendbund
mademoiselle bourienne and the little princess had to own to themselves


with a clear, bright expression, as if asking them to notice how calmly
society so dearly and distinctly indicated.
some of the soldiers were frightened and ran away, others went on
his trap. the innkeeper stood at the gate.
glancing at denísov.
once the stranger closed the book, putting in a marker, and again,
harness bells; she hears him coming! he comes in, just in the shape of a
another, a younger voice, interrupted him: “afraid or not, you can’t
once been in to see the count. he has not sent for me.... i am sorry for
have employed in loving him, were being vainly wasted, with no advantage
“o-hoy!” came at that moment, that inimitable huntsman’s call
“so what are your orders? are you starting tomorrow?” asked savélich.
the yard and in the house. the count had been out since morning. the
sighed deeply, his whole chest heaving, and was silent for a while. “i
to do. i went to my room and reread joseph alexéevich’s letters and
    chapter xii
way from moscow, and so on. but all this was only talk; in reality
“when i told him that duty and the oath were above everything, he
affairs, which called for some decisive action. their town house and

room hearing the sound of the peasants’ voices that reached her from
notice—forget what i have said!”

within four years he had paid off all his remaining debts without
foot through the town.
and so conforms to the chief condition of motion (absolute continuity)

“but what’s to be done? she can’t help it,” thought the princess.
it was only by the keener wind that met them and the jerks given by the
her sympathy for pierre, but by involuntary intonations and a half smile
singing songs....”
consciousness that they had captured part of the battlefield and had
elbows on the table, thinking always of the same terrible question:
“whatever trouble may come,” prince andrew continued, “i beg
for more than anything else in the world, did not know how to approach

to the russians as the knoll battery or raévski’s redoubt, and to the
the thuerassa, he merely saves us a great deal of trouble and all our
with the self-satisfaction of a man on parade, he stepped lightly with
merchant-class—les états généraux (states-general)—evoked in him a whole
“oh, my bower new...!” chimed in twenty voices, and the castanet
in the village of górki.
(thiers says), and he issued the order for departure which the whole
but though they all realized that it was necessary to get away, there
three beats: “oh mio crudele affetto.”... one, two, three... one,

even in the best, most friendly and simplest relations of life, praise
wrote down his own name in french, comte pierre besouhoff, but the
else the tsar did.
lifted is no longer the same as the arm i now refrain from lifting,
“that’s a sign of a good harvest next year.”
meaning, that several times she was on the point of abandoning
to clear up this last point for himself, prince andrew, utilizing his
day before. a crowd of military men was assembled there, members of the

position is now a terrible one,” continued anna mikháylovna, sadly,
guardian of all that the nations hold sacred, utilizes religion for the
a fictitious but a live character who like every man had his personal

silent.
with that maniac’s bullet in my body?”
of the apparently original action. that a criminal was reared among
national war but to die, and kutúzov died.
transient and incomprehensible—but he remembered her as he had last
“he’s with the army, father, at smolénsk.”
“the first man that turns up—she forgets her father and everything

“but it’s already ten.”
chapter x
“só-o-onya! look here! how can you torture me and yourself like that,
sergeant was an impostor, that he had lied, and that the whole russian
him.
   at nighttime in the moon’s fair glow
“that’s a true friend!” said hélène beaming, and again touching
much that the count held him up as a pattern to the other guests. berg
tones.
to her own question. “but no, no, he must... yes, mary, he must....”
father’s door. “why are these people with frightened faces stopping me?
now heard nothing else. on the right of the battery soldiers shouting
to the house, questioning him as to the state of affairs. it appeared

examinations to qualify for the grades of collegiate assessor and
and anxiety that his name should not be smirched now seemed not merely
proud expression she had not seen on it before. he inquired about her
“had i seen her before as she is now,” thought nicholas, “i should
behind his back. his old sister-in-law popped in a small bundle, and one
the guns.
cannot imagine how it shocked me. we were not an exemplary couple,” he
“you are unhappy, my dear sir,” the stranger continued. “you
pultúsk to petersburg returns bringing our appointment as commander in
he thought: “but how strange it is that he should not know that now

his weapons clean and polished to the utmost, and every horse groomed

crept unobserved into his heart and once more bound him to life. and
another.
that by resigning himself now to the force of circumstances and to those
“on the 4th, the first courier arrives from petersburg. the mails
that beyond me and above me there are spirits, and that in this world
between a man who says that the people of the west moved on the east
tripping rapidly across in her little shoes trimmed with bows, ran
line to reconnoiter personally, and twice to the emperors, russian and
at the council at filí the prevailing thought in the minds of the
after meeting princess mary, though the course of his life went on
me... myself most of all. then i don’t eat, don’t wash... and how is

to a footman dressed in knee breeches, shoes, and a swallow-tail coat,
could not say with certainty whether the attack had been repulsed or his
public interest from being felt or even noticed. most of the people at
use of him and amused himself at his expense without letting the other
saying: “they will swell up with russian cabbage, burst with our
her, feeling that she was in no mood for their conversation. count
“come, come!” she said, not letting go of his arm. and they went to
beyond vyázma the french army instead of moving in three columns huddled
and, waving her thin arms from under the woolen shawl, cried:
junction with the first one from which it was said to be cut off by
chapter xiii
son has sacrificed himself for his mother,” as people were saying.



down the room.
of the battle and had now caused him to run away from his home and, in
as if at times there radiated from them shafts of warm light)—were

nothing in freemasonry but the external forms and ceremonies, and prized
been in other days, and which, as he learned from the talk of the
occupy a position he had not himself chosen, because the popular demand
while dressing, and yet the question he was always putting off demanded
among the russian people. but no one at the time foresaw (what now seems
quite at random on one word and the murmur on another. this reading,
the soldier with the swollen cheek looked angrily at the cavalry
offend me. really i have some,” rostóv repeated.
light and long dark shadows. the forest at the farthest extremity of
“i cannot help loving the light, it is not my fault. and i am very

túshin’s guns had been intended to cannonade the valley, he was
and how frightened he was! he thought that i should kill him. why should
her shabbiest dress and an old mantilla, natásha, shivering in the fresh
a company smile but was evidently tormented by jealousy; now she turned
the person for whom they were waiting. some walked thoughtfully up and
“quite different and yet the same,” thought nicholas, looking at her

vish to destroy my men for your pleasure!”
to avoid his old acquaintances with their commiseration and offensive
superiority over his sister), natásha gave him a wink, and neither

seems less heavy.”
kutúzov accompanied by his adjutants rode at a walking pace behind the
without replying. belliard began talking loudly and eagerly to the
calculations of the cabalistic number of the beast of the apocalypse now
“i have no betrothed: i have refused him!” cried natásha.
have been expected to be eager to attack—employed his whole strength to
a solemn meeting of the lodge of the second degree was convened, at
of st. bartholomew was due to charles ix’s stomach being deranged. but

seeing them he kept thinking, “that may be the very standard with

“no, it’s not he. how can you talk such nonsense?”
powder smoke and stopped in despair. everything seemed lost. but at that

after those involuntary words—that if he were free he would have asked
regarded the whole business of the war not with his intelligence or his
him.” the mere thought of her father’s look filled her with terror.
those of higher ranks in the order. 3. morality. 4. love of mankind. 5.
the lid of the case containing the carpets would not shut down. a few
yes, ‘i shall look forward very much to your return.’ oh, how happy i
the mason cleared his throat huskily, as old men do, and called his
the walls, and a big fly flopped at the head of the bed and around the

a particular glamour and glad keenness of impression to everything that
got there he leaned on his elbows and, smiling, talked to her for a long
the temperature shown by the political thermometer to the company that

those human wills, man’s mind postulates arbitrary and disconnected
russian voice.
to be reserved because in the depth of my soul i feel too near to him
hélène’s hand several times. after a while they were left alone
terrible, and now he has this authority of a commander in chief of
at the appointed hour, however, he entered the modest house speránski
had not exasperated the vicomte, and had convinced herself that it was
a pleasant feeling of excitement and an expectation of something
with natásha, piquet with his father, and even his comfortable bed
chapter xiii
the family—that is, one wife or one husband. natásha needed a husband. a
power as an explanation of historical events is best demonstrated by




but opened them again on hearing the bedstead creak. the countess was
face all lit up by the moonlight. he slipped his arms under the cloak
“look at papa!” shouted natásha to the whole company, and quite


activity, and guide him in planning his future actions. just the same is
kaysárov, his adjutant’s brother.
of the campfire, waving his uplifted arm.
edge of the clearing. the seconds, measuring the paces, left tracks in
“well, then, are you refusing prince andrew?” said sónya.
labors, hoping to drive away the evil spirit that threatened him. toward

family, but by the tender friendship his commander showed him, rostóv
was appetizing and nourishing, the saltpeter flavor of the gunpowder
that his serene highness did not wish his face to be seen.

that daniel and i are often quite astounded,” said simon, well knowing
of possessing it agitated and awed him.
chapter vii

bolkhovítinov gave a detailed account from the beginning of all he had
them, he rejoiced as though seeing all this for the first time. what for

provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
boldly and hurriedly, in a husky but melodious bass voice.
growing ever stronger and fuller and merging into a deafening roar.
and his eyebrows were lifted, then his eyebrows would descend and
pierre finished his story. natásha continued to look at him intently

“just a few oats?” said misha, cheerfully and readily.
málo-yaroslávets, the place where the last battle with the french was

must ride up.... shall we both course it?” answered nicholas, seeing
then davout’s, and then ney’s—ran, as it were, the gauntlet of the


another. i’d sleep a bit and then again go and kiss the relics, and

unconsciously put out her tongue as if chiding herself. seeing that
the guards. he was clean-shaven and wore a guardsman’s padded coat with
“borís,” she said to her son with a smile, “i shall go in to see
talk.
sónya did not succumb to the tender tone natásha used toward her.
chapter i
there—those stockings are to be a surprise for me.”
him; not think of him but forget him, quite forget him for the present.

his eyes significantly.
majesty.

and all would have been well.”

feel like it, she became enthusiastic in order not to disappoint the
to her straightened out a turned-up corner of the carpet.) “and
just then the lady companion who lived with hélène came in to announce
middle of which soldiers were watering their lean horses at the pump
before commencing negotiations, but in just the same way two months ago
inevitability today use that law as a weapon against religion, though
conflict of magnanimity between the mother and the daughter, ending in

years the whole course of life is altered and presents an intensive
“the whole plan of our order should be based on the idea of
arms on the table and began to read. after reading a few lines, he

i want to weep for joy.”
a b c of war or of politics, and that bonaparte was an insignificant
the fog had grown so dense that though it was growing light they could
think of us!” cried his wife, referring to the rumors of war and the

“gently, gently! can’t you do it more gently?” said the emperor

name of my dead father, who was a good master to you, and of my brother
sounds of falling drops and the munching of the horses near by, could be

away and attend to your father with your own unpracticed, awkward hands,
understand him. at length when he had understood and looked in the
had guarded and which is now no more. they reek of decay and death. only
glance became more animated as his conclusions became more hopeless.
of the commander in chief’s special favor he was sent with the news of

entered the drawing room elegantly dressed in the uniform of an
        to my native land...”


till tears started to his eyes.
figure of túshin who was sitting cross-legged like a turk beside him.
to stop, knew the danger of his extended position, and knew that the
hand, was clearing manure from the cowhouse, looked out, and his face
our hearts are united by indissoluble bonds, my heart rebels against
they woke late and were again delayed so often that they only got as far
he pleases, at once assumed her own position to be correct, as she
eyes, glittering feverishly, met pierre with a questioning look the


gloomily frowning and smoking a pipe, and little one-armed túshin still
three tents with flaps turned back, pitched at the edge of a birch wood.
mother’s sympathy while she rubs the bump comforts it. the doctors were
the very time he was expressing this conviction to himself, in another
activity of all those who opposed the tendency that then prevailed in

know that there is going to be a battle tomorrow?”
experienced for a long while. she did not realize who and where she
grew in harmonious triumphant strength, and pétya listened to their
face was calm, gentle, and happy. clutching her breast to keep herself
with sleepy eyes, tell princess mary anything. with just the same smile
etc. and as usual nothing happened in accord with the disposition.
clanking sabers and subdued talk, their horses’ hoofs splashing in the

“i am russian,” he said quickly.
not cause the least embarrassment to countess bezúkhova, who evidently
emperor and the whole army, especially while the smoke hung over
procured. after swallowing a little she had been so frightened that she
and the curtain dropped. once more there was a terrible noise and
matter! abroad no one will know anything about it. isn’t that so? and
field of austerlitz, enduring the heedless blows of his left foot and
worse than others.”
the world he had lived in—his strength, his disdain for the comforts of
even those, fond of intellectual talk and of expressing their feelings,

his order had been executed. an attendant came in with punch. napoleon
what was needed for him who, overshadowing others, stood at the head of
expressed)—this came about because his commands did not correspond to
“never, never marry, my dear fellow! that’s my advice: never marry


“it isn’t wanted, pólya. tell them to take it away,” replied

emperor, though he met him twice, did not favor him with a single word.

of men can do without the conception of power, the existence of power is
playing chess. berg held a smoking pipe between his knees. borís, in
other causes that adapted themselves to the event that was happening or
went out, following her aunt.
have done your best to increase his mental sufferings.”
“no, you can’t understand what i learned from that illiterate man—that
market stalls, granaries—for the most part still stocked with goods—and
the people in so strange a manner, contrary to the tsar’s wish, to

running to the door and the noise of a chair falling over, and a girl
histories of the culture of that period.
daughter.
was a deafening report, and all were enveloped in a cloud of smoke. the
elated. he had noticed a solitary tree ahead of him. this tree had been

factories because he was comfortable there, that at krásnoe he checked
de-tra-va-ga-la” he sang.
“eh, is she pretty?” he asked with a wink.

another. “the day before yesterday it was ‘napoléon, france,

which she had heard before.
he remembered the peasants and dron the village elder, and mentally
“well, and you, young man,” said he. “how do you feel, mon

of the victory that had been gained. prince andrew introduced his
an ambush, that they should not be seen and might be able to strike an
and get away to attend to her duties as hostess. but pierre now
pierre did not see the people as individuals but saw their movement.
on back, come to me by the back door, afraid of being seen by the
far from mikúlino where the forest ran close to the road. since then,
and it is of this period of the campaign—when the army lacked boots
succeeded in forestalling the french he was to delay them as long as
the one below. natásha jumped on it, sank into the feather bed, rolled
presenting an envelope.
the next. hélène was touched, and more than once tears rose to her eyes
with me!” thought he, full of an irrepressible fury that welled up
“a little wound, but he has been made an officer; he is well now, he
“kindly step in, my orders are to bring you in.”
her that things must be so, and yet it was dreadfully sad.
nothing certain was known about it, partly because there was a vague
russian soil.
russian position—at the shevárdino redoubt—and unexpectedly for the

the door.
“but that’s the grand duke, and i want the commander in chief or the

the hall porter, “i know count cyril vladímirovich is very ill...
series of events, and corresponding with this generalization the whole
she began to smile and talk. he asked about mutual acquaintances, and
delighted at the unexpected rapidity of his pupil’s progress, but could
“as i was saying to you, andrew, be kind and generous as you always

when they came out onto the beaten highroad—polished by sleigh runners
and the reading of the letter began. after a brief description of
but before he had finished speaking, prince andrew, feeling tears of
expression—the same man who had rushed out of the wattle shed. at that

of enterprise which always accompany the opening of a campaign.
deceived you. let us go to mamma.”
drops.
in the same tone.

familiar voice, “what i say is that if it were possible to know

have dared to say so, knew it and blushed scarlet every time dólokhov
needed for success in the service was not effort or work, or courage, or
what are your commands?”
calm and careless an air as though he were merely out for a ride. he
and nicholas’ letter to the rostóvs, keeping the appeal, the bulletin,



and went to the door.
don’t go. i will order supper. go downstairs, we will come immediately.”
ordered the horses to be saddled. but just as daniel was about to
were of the same age and both handsome fellows, though not alike. borís

“why no, my dear fellow,” said the astonished narrator, shrugging
just made for a baby’s seat. just look!”

looking at the puff from the gun that had sent the ball. his eyes
succeeds. he sat motionless, looking at the heights visible above
the floor of the stage consisted of smooth boards, at the sides was

your old father...” he paused unexpectedly, and then in a querulous

“we here in moscow are more occupied with dinner parties and scandal


was rallied about princess bolkónskaya.
him, and suddenly, noticing his shining eyes, stepped lightly up to him
city where peasants can bring their surplus supplies and the products of
did that day. but no sooner had natásha finished her barcarolle than
than any words could have done—did he betray to himself, to her, and to
lay down on his bed groaning and loudly exclaimed, ‘my god!’ why didn’t
life appeared in a new light. “why do i strive, why do i toil in this
you?” he asked.
krásnoe and orshá.
of the moment. in reality, however, all these movements forward and
of sixteen who had recently joined the regiment, was now in the same
the prince was silent and looked indifferent. but, with the womanly and
slowly and steadily without hurry. at daybreak, however, those nearing

calamitous condition was the sending of lauriston to kutúzov’s camp with

rostóvs, and that it was impossible in their presence even to mention
began to read. from reading he passed to sleeping, from sleeping to
voice, “would you like to see little nicholas? he is always talking
audibly that the coachman asked him:

orders, to go against the french, and they shouted something about
him, but stood frowning by the door of the hut.
boots and the clinking of spurs that came to a stop, and a respectful
some flash as of an electric spark shot from telyánin’s eyes to
held next day. prince andrew, as one closely connected with speránski
“jacob, bring a bottle!” shouted the host, a tall, handsome fellow
till two in the afternoon and bore away with them the wounded and the

going: and besides—i am not joan of arc or an amazon.”
been reassigned to his former squadron, had been on duty and had gone
mother, if borís happened to be mentioned, she spoke quite freely of
“satisfactory, indeed! very satisfactory! barbara ivánovna told me today
they do not even seem to see me, or if they do they look as if they
french—through the very gate by which he had left it four days
she felt that it was impossible to ask, or to answer, in words.
strange and ridiculous to meet objections from russian generals and to
and thoughtful for a good while, told me his view of the matter, which
house of moderate size, situated on the very banks of the river. neither

“it’s all up! i’m lost!” thought he. “now a bullet through my

with the precision and definiteness customary in addressing prisoners,
seen. from behind this came women’s laughter and whispers. natásha,
at peace, and immediately felt this.
front. pierre stood smiling but silent. one man, older than the others
“yes, yes.” and nicholas, taking his little daughter in his strong hand,

been revealed, holy oil trickles from the cheeks of our blessed mother,

was rubbing his forehead and eyes with his hand. a short man was saying
painful to think of the danger, since it is not in man’s power to
also in french:
he touched his horse and having called milorádovich, the commander of
was not with them, the count decided to stay with márya dmítrievna
the porch and the cook came running into the vestibule.
him as a man, but what can one do?”

still sound, yellowish teeth.
“can one see from there?... if you would...”
same inquisitive, challenging, and rather mocking eyes still looked
cloudless, northern, summer night. pierre took an open cab intending
chemical elements of dissolution.
hare, threw it neatly and smartly across his horse’s back as if by
pierre.
into a tragic spectacle that remained in every memory, and on the
not staying here long this time—nor are you—i will try to amuse
his adjutants galloped into the yard before him. kutúzov was impatiently
“why did you not succeed in impressing on bonaparte by diplomatic
rostóv and most of the officers after the review.
how he could ask such a question. pierre went into the study. prince

treated only with internal and external applications of vodka) was the


anna mikháylovna sat down beside him, with her own handkerchief wiped
patiently to disentangle them. the countess, with her loving heart, felt
and again jumping up, dashed so impetuously forward that it seemed as if
prince interrupted her.
faces, whom the officers keeping order tried in vain to drive from the
ceases to exist, but the french army of six hundred thousand, and
poor, and they intrigue, the astraea lodge against the manna seekers,


where the steward’s high bedstead stood with its patchwork quilt.
for his ride.
collecting a library and has made it a rule not to buy a new book
as soon as the king began to speak loud and fast his royal dignity

charged with them beside him. rostóv heard the story and not only said
it was growing light, the sky was clearing, only a single cloud lay in
subject of metaphysics, even the manifestation of the force of free will
“a child?” shouted a frenchman from above. “i did hear something

and noticed long ago at the ball in petersburg. he was now in an
giving the messenger a significant look.

paper and her hand moved rapidly over it. this is the reply she wrote,
and still less speak about it, but must only attend to one’s own work.


outrages are committed against the almost unarmed inhabitants. and the
him if not to join in at least to listen to what he was saying. but the
and impossible, he again glanced timidly at her. she did not sit down
for the russians was, and was bound to be, that we were brought nearer
natásha.
look in his shining eyes, he told the whole story of his life: his
“can it or can it not be?” he now thought as he looked at her and
congratulations and greetings from acquaintances that met him on all

why did he not retire at once by the kalúga road, abandoning moscow? and
been at work on the battery, threw down their spades and ran to meet the
rostóv saw overhead the old familiar cornice with a bit of plaster
“well, how are you going to get out of that?” he remarked.
the project gutenberg ebook of war and peace, by leo tolstoy
while the count was being turned over, one of his arms fell back
speaking to the colonel gave pierre an angry look and went away again
owing to the count’s customary carelessness nothing was ready for their


pedestal from which he, the commander in chief, devoted all his powers
up, blushed with pleasure, forgot the official manner he had been
his own soul—vividly, plainly, terribly, and almost as a certainty. and
ready, the stranger opened his eyes, moved to the table, filled a
“only i feel afraid in his presence. i am always afraid when i’m


there were very many of these, as one could easily believe, looking
adjutant.
had come straight from the bath... papa used to...”
wrenching herself from márya dmítrievna’s hands with a vicious effort

the countess began to soothe natásha, who after first listening to her
looked attentively at the carts in the yard and while going up to the
down.

nothing could be seen. pitch-dark, brother! isn’t there something to
“well, this is strange! do you suppose i... who could think?... i know

head while you were asleep. forgive me, daddy,’ he says, ‘for christ’s
next day toward evening the princess set off, and pierre’s head steward
not to have to repent is not enough. i lived like that, i lived for
     devil.”
ourselves to risks we must not risk our children.”
the baron.
come off their heads.
and dissatisfied about something and that at headquarters they were

of his reign, being the savior of russia.
wounded under him and his own arm slightly grazed by a bullet. as a mark
the commander in chief would inspect the regiment on the march. though
    chapter vii
after looking at him napoleon smiled.
while denísov was talking to the esaul, pétya—abashed by denísov’s
lying and replied through the closed door that she did not mean to go
necessary to enable it to retreat without losing its heavy equipment.
the institutions of state and church are erected.
to hide such a big pistol even under his wide coat. he could not
at any of them but smiling on all, as if graciously allowing each the
“what d’you think of the treat? all on silver plate,” one of them
possible. sónya and her mother put themselves entirely in her hands.
stick. pierre, from club habit, always left both hat and stick in the
looking about him uneasily, and an awkward pause followed.
the commander of the regiment, a thin, feeble-looking old man with a
gaze.
during that twenty-year period an immense number of fields were left
not necessary to entertain so freely as when the count had been marshal,

did not wait to be called. the shapely figure of the fair-haired
some incomprehensible, mysterious power continued to control them, and
“but where was she left?” asked pierre.
it would be too painful to me to think that i might be a cause of sorrow
till she was twenty, and arranged her life so that her whole time was
in the provinces at a distance from moscow, ladies, and gentlemen in
to inquiries as to where the prince lived, pointed out a small newly

obviously in haste to say what he had to.

or two. the rest of the year life pursued its unbroken routine with its
all in due order.
that dread of beaten tracks, and wish to express itself in a manner
chapter xviii
“it is not the sugar i want, but only that your little hand should stir
left wing, napoleon said it should not be done, without explaining
talk and to hear a human voice. the satisfaction of one’s needs—good
anna mikháylovna was already embracing her and weeping. the countess
exists between the expression of someone’s will and the execution of
“i am afraid for the baby,” she said to mademoiselle bourienne:
shaking the hare for the blood to drip off, and anxiously glancing round
in my own, if i preferred my own happiness to my love and duty to the
mary.
quarters and riding up to captain timókhin who was walking in front.
to all those rules. she felt that the allurements instinct had formerly
the logs together.
called everyone without exception and without the slightest variation
dozen members, of whom half were as well able to pay as himself, pierre
and sometimes laughed. nearest of all to the commander in chief walked
for your obstinacy,” said kírsten.
up at all!”
must go and call on her. you would at least be seeing somebody, and i
the young count paid no heed to them, but, breathing hard, passed by
“hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!” thundered from all sides, one regiment
dead-looking evergreen firs dotted about in the forest, and this oak,

“oh, what a terrible state he is in! one would not know him, he is so
(she glanced at hélène and smiled at her.) “my dear hélène, be
“one must admit,” continued prince andrew, “that napoleon as a man

which had disappeared, but at french infantry who had come into the

earthly things, that had incessantly tormented him, no longer presented
envious looks which had followed him out from both sides, and the face
position. when anything particularly difficult or nasty had to be
“dispositions for an attack on the enemy position behind kobelnitz and
that’s certain! there’s only one way—guewilla warfare!”
go off by themselves in different directions hoping to find food and
condolence paid to him on the occasion of his daughter’s death said of
count moved to go out of the room, taking the papers, probably to reread
demanded a general engagement. lubomírski, bronnítski, wlocki, and the
family, was the most gifted with a capacity to feel any shades of
interested to know how prince andrew had taken the news. ten minutes

all his wishes were being fulfilled that morning: there was to be a
the emperor’s manifesto was read, evoking enthusiasm, and then all moved
pleasurable and exhilarating effect on rostóv than the previous sounds
from the time that pierre began life as a family man on a footing
three weeks surrounded by a court that included princes, dukes, kings,

told you, but you would not believe it,” she said triumphantly. “he

rather confine ourselves to studying those sublime rules which our

“my head, be it good or bad, must depend on itself,” said he, rising
if many simultaneously and variously directed forces act on a given

“that’s all the same,” continued márya dmítrievna. “if they hear of

town—was one it was more flattering to be received in than any other.
out.
the line that had so sharply divided the two armies?” he asked himself
those women—mostly mothers—who, having once made up their minds,
he came to the point at once, treating her ceremoniously.
the connection between those men and the nations has not been found.
natásha’s face had told her. she did not speak any more to natásha of
of a force compelling men to direct their activity toward a certain end.
“get into step, fëdor... i say, fëdor!” said the foremost peasant.
in me—everyone must know it: pierre, and that young girl who wanted to
when they had crossed the crimean bridge the prisoners moved a few steps
makes things trying for you, doesn’t it?” prince andrew asked
pausing. “the only question is what will come of the meeting between
“all well?” asked rostóv, drawing away his arm.
up before him, who all presented arms with their eyes fixed on their
“he is good and kind and i am fond of him!” he thought of dessalles.
rest of the french army they might easily be destroyed. the soldiers and
will of alexander. but the universal historian gervinus, refuting this
more and more animated and evidently wishing to express his new outlook
to twitch. the twitching increased, the handsome mouth was drawn to one

the handsome boy adjutant with the long hair sighed deeply without
driver who had known dólokhov and anatole some six years and had given
blockhead!”
with the dogs, while from under them could be seen her gray hair and
presents and dinner parties to the whole district on name days; there
breaking, the rain had ceased, and the clouds were dispersing. it felt


the things were treading heavily on the parquet floors. the yard was
a service of prayer. all that denísov had said was clever and to the
“but this is very important, from general dokhtúrov,” said
madman who did not know what he was doing.”
for the cup was an hussar who wanted a drink; but he neither knew nor
everything seemed simple and natural.
and replacing their purses and pocketbooks, entered the ballroom. first
bear my cross. but if i forgive her for the sake of doing right, then
question of the dowry, nor spoken to his wife about it. at one time the
everything.”
“sophie,” he began, timidly at first and then more and more
two people. they were the yard porter ignát, and the page boy míshka,

but the talk in every group was chiefly about the emperor alexander. his
“it is not at all what you suppose; but that is what the german


looked inquiringly at pierre and, as if pierre’s look had told him
farther back in history the object of our observation lies, the more
animated by that address anna pávlovna’s guests talked for a long time
simply, and truly carrying out the great work which saved russia. but

take murat prisoner; nor the result of immediately destroying the whole
recommended to the empress) and at the same time to console him, so she
all—read.
my heart at ease.... aníska, go, you horrid girl, show him the way!” she

nicholas tried to keep silence when his mother spoke of the princess,
public baths if i may say so. ah, when one looks at our young people,

her guests, first the vicomte and then the abbé, as peculiarly choice
invented for them long ago because they have power! the success of a
that frenchwoman.”
but our stories are the stories of men who have been under the enemy’s
go natásha came in with rapid steps, not having done up her hair or
immediately overtake the enemy he had selected. that frenchman, by his
smile was unlike the half-smile of other people. when he smiled,
with his little burden to the gruzínski garden at the corner of the
in the evening, when prince andrew had left, the countess went up to
his majesty the emperor derogates from the principle of our alliance...
chapter xxx
that she would not be able to bear it and would burst into sobs in his
“it is unavoidable,” said prince andrew with a sigh.
weakness of the french, and the administration of that shock which
dining and taking rather too much of the hungarian wine, nicholas—having

chair, wrapped in a powdering mantle, entrusting his head to tíkhon.
drummer, their leader, turned round facing the singers, and flourishing
them good service with his troykas. more than once when anatole’s
thanks especially to the fact that the privations came so gradually that
solemn voice to recite the words of the prayer....
place. the doctor was very much displeased about something and made a
“halt! dress your ranks!” the order of the regimental commander was
trees cawing impatiently. around the tents, over more than five acres,

and natásha kissed her brother and ran away.


could be heard. it was there prince andrew thought the fight would
unfriendly now became gentle and affectionate. the angry eldest

added.
of hearts. on the previous sunday the old count had given his son
“if all russians are in the least like you, it is sacrilege to fight

leisurely visiting, with our own horses and like a true country couple,

and musketry ahead of him. the firing grew louder and louder.

with a french guardsman he had captured. the prisoner said that the
in the total darkness the soldiers walked with pierre to mozháysk.


worried by the question of what news balashëv had brought and how he
him, and her eyes met his beaming at her. she set herself a task on her
“oh yes, i heard it today,” said shinshín, coming into the

are so considerable as not to allow of your taking the offensive? on the

longed to love with this new pure divine love that had been revealed to
for the first time.

of his, and that he was not called on to judge concerning them and
said that the festering might take a normal course. then fever set in,
all eyes were gazing at her with one and the same expression. she
and the countess bent over her reticule to hide her agitated face. sónya
father and of prince andrew. involuntarily she thought their thoughts
recent as that mental picture was, rostopchín already felt that it had
had left the room all the officers burst into loud laughter and mary
“has he come?” natásha asked quickly in a whisper, afraid to move lest


trembling lips—came out and passed through the waiting room, clutching
on the spirits of the company, but no one took any notice of his being
dangers. during these wanderings, pierre noticed that he was spoken
what was going on in the passage. some women passing with quiet steps in
unable to understand all the complex significance his words had for

glanced at berg with a smile.
anatole followed him with his usual jaunty step but his face betrayed
been put off,” said the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, by force
battalion would follow him.
“as there’s no one to fall in love with on campaign, he’s fallen
the old count pretended to be angry.
thoughtful expression of his face.
“and i have known so many cases of a splinter wound” (the gazette said
with silver plate, two turkish pistols and a saber—a present from

conquerors caused the wars and that it is possible to find the laws of
“but that’s impossible.”
could remember it and weep or pray.
that had seized them at the start. once at a standstill they all seemed
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
“i don’t know when i began to love her, but i have loved her and her
for it; but when her youngest: the scapegrace who had been bad at

30,000 went for the upkeep of the estate near moscow, the town house,
to be heard.
there’s no end to it. russian wenches, by heaven, so they are! in
french would take was unknown, and so the closer our troops trod on
darkness.
a modern branch of mathematics having achieved the art of dealing with

melancholy with mademoiselle karágina,” said pierre.

up like a fool!” he thought, looking irritably at her. “she is
“no, papa is not back yet,” said sónya.

guests surrounded him. magnítski, addressing himself to speránski,
pierre mastered his wrath. “i don’t know that and don’t want to,” he

“yes, yes, of course,” interrupted prince vasíli impatiently,

the artful maneuvers suggested by our generals meant fresh movements of
else.
thought only of one thing, her sorrow, which, after the break caused
governesses, lived three miles from the rostóvs.
at the sentinel. “je vous demande si le colonel est ici.” *

of fire and had descended into the dip, he was met by some of the staff,
plain that he had had a lesson) and stopped behind the count. this
he had done seven years before at austerlitz.
people to leave moscow was false; on the contrary he was glad that
restore the daughter to her mother and go to save someone else. pierre
still he was lifted and laid on the stretcher.
regiment but was not liked; rostóv especially detested him and was
it is!” thought the officer, and he rode round the whole camp. one man
the avenue leading to the house as if he were entering an enchanted,
“ah, what a mad bweed you wostóvs are!” he muttered, and rostóv

    book eight: 1811 - 12
in such cases they omit all that makes for the contrary. and the more
still greater purity and clearness what they were both feeling.
“quite beside themselves, yákov alpátych; they’ve fetched another
sónya and began sorting patterns with her.

though countess mary told natásha that those words in the gospel must be
it very often happened that in a moment of irritation husband and wife
rows of statues in niches) and looking significantly at the lady’s old


the “heroes”) of the efficacy of the directions issued in wartime by
chapter iv
bleeding human bodies that seemed to fill the whole of the low tent, as
once to the general on duty.”
museum and belabor them in the russian way till all the nonsense jumps
to raise its voice. this was the party of the elders, reasonable men
shouted at him. it seemed to pétya that at the moment the shot was
of mingled shame and vexation.
the smell of the food the preobrazhénskis were eating and a sense of
alders too are coming out.... but the oaks show no sign yet. ah, here is
first place because her provinces have been pillaged—they say the holy
natásha had broken off her engagement. he seemed in better spirits than
“ah, my dear, my dear!” he began, rising and taking her by both
“ah, nikíta iványch!” cried nicholas, rising politely, and as if wishing
something to eat a while ago. he was awfully hungry!”
the tsar looked intently and observantly into kutúzov’s eye
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’ with no other
during the two days that elapsed before rostóv called, princess mary
removed to boguchárovo. seventy quarters of grain had also been carted

days of her own girlhood and her own first ball. the host also followed
he was being crushed, together with that of rapture, still further
table, a child’s table, and the little chair on which prince andrew
was perfectly true. he was afraid of getting some other officer into
lower one, and something like two distinct smiles played continually

was the duty of every man; that...” they interrupted him, for this

dimmler the musician and his wife, vogel the dancing master and his
“to prince vasíli. he was so kind. he at once agreed to everything,
natásha looked at him, and by way of answer to his words her eyes

his chest covered with orders and a scarf drawn round his stomach,
some victim and fight and smother it, and the victim, enfeebled or
and her son. she had opportunities of sending her letters to the grand



but how did that old man, alone, in opposition to the general opinion,
    * “look here, no nonsense!”

“deal with him as you think fit! i hand him over to you.”

begin shouting, but i am not one to be shouted down. i said what i had
“good!” said murat and, turning to one of the gentlemen in his suite,
he paused and looked around.
andrew out to him, and he told them to carry him into the tent.
“vile woman!” shouted the princess, darting unexpectedly at anna
“natálya ilyníchna behaves very well to me,” remarked borís. “i
on him—though it happened not to be the emperor—frantically shouted
he feared a court-martial and was worried over the affair, which was

dinner,” cried several voices. “we’ll take you in hand.”
mítenka flew headlong down the six steps and ran away into the

when the count returned, natásha was impolitely pleased and hastened
audience over his spectacles and continued.
died in this place.... when a new one comes he is done for in a week,”
in front with lanterns.
the current rumors from all sides and gave superficial and hasty orders

language: english
national war. and only that feeling placed him on that highest human
majesty to preserve humanity from the calamity of another war.
kazán, and the things belonging to these institutions had already been
sacrificed myself. but only the base, the vile succeed! i know who has
unfolding of the oak buds is the cause of the cold wind, for the
was now afraid of everything.

“we’re to go into action, gentlemen! mack has surrendered with his



with the physical pain. it was they, these soldiers—wounded and

incapacity already in 1807.”
kórchevo—a certain khandrikóv—is up to; till now the additional

we are conscious of, we feel ourselves to be free.
and two or three friends—you among them—and as for the rest i only
himself had vanished. he was filled with happiness at his nearness to
russian side merely because in petersburg—far from the seat of war—a
go away without having heard from the staff—and this interested him
down again and her lips puckered.
“ah, here she is, the queen of petersburg, countess bezúkhova,”

the unknown general looked disdainfully down at kozlóvski, who was


at bald hills with his wife. this pleasure will be but a brief one,
then that same face pale, quivering, and suffering, as it had been when

he had been ordered to look for the commander in chief, he could not,
they halted in silence. there was nothing fresh to be seen from the
rising up in her for the whole household, because they were always the
not thinking her own thoughts but feeling bound to think like her father


to the ladies and listened to her. in the midst of a phrase he ceased
recognizing the falsity of this view of history, another set of

youth, we’ve had our fling and lived and reveled. eh? and now, when
round-shouldered captain túshin, stumbling over the tail of the gun

carriages, and carpets from the polish proprietors. rostóv remembered
horses and ilyá iványch. i don’t think ilyá drives anyone except
from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by two footmen, who
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the

pierre rose, rubbed his eyes, and seeing the pistol with an engraved
the whole position of our troops. pierre listened to him, straining each
(the liberal attempts at the beginning of his reign, his struggle with

austrian troops, under the direction of so skillful a leader as general
the table, summoned his daughter. he never gave his children a blessing,
“what’s happening here? may i come with you?” he asked.
forced on me. even now” (he emphasized the word) “i am ready to receive
you who’s starving us to death! is it? take this and this!’ and i
them together—their great numbers. as with the physical law of gravity,

previously, is quite baseless, which again shows that napoleon’s cold on
if he had come out of a russian bath—in a short coat and with his hair
their shoulders but not venturing to utter the implied word—le
want to know.”

     wafting sweet music o’er the lea,
could she have a love letter from him in her hand?

assenting to everything denísov asked him. denísov turned away from him

while i feel so much strength and youth in me,” he said to himself.

prince andrew gave him a look, but said nothing and went away. he felt

her. trying to convict her, he told her she had worn him out, had caused

rostóv was very happy in the love they showed him; but the first
at that moment, on the road leading from the big house, two women and a
was, when he met the big coach just entering the town gates was appalled

“it’s nothing, mamma, really it’s nothing; only pétya startled
and involuntarily noticed the carefully washed seams of the scar near
the eyes of the general and the soldier met. the general became silent,
the order of the day for tomorrow. and you,” he continued, addressing
the whole weight of his wrath fell on her. she was to blame that a spy
all were silent.
fixed on.
select him—an old man in disfavor—to be their representative in the
in his hand, was sitting there with a smile of deep emotion on his face,
the princess gave orders to harness for her journey, the peasants had
the original line of the russian forces along the river kolochá had
she gave her companion an angry glance.
     the general.”
the former housekeeper, old mávra kuzmínichna, had stepped out of the

in 1809 count ilyá rostóv was living at otrádnoe just as he had done
“you treat me like an invalid or a child. i see it all! did you behave
the french.
i say it with my hand on my heart!” said he, striking his chest.

they were silent for a while.
thinking? i mustn’t forget. how shall i speak to the emperor? no,
proposed that plan to barclay de tolly and now wished to propose it

then, unexpectedly, as often happens, the sound of the hunt suddenly
whole day.
adjutants met him with news of the successful result of the action.

throne with her hair down. she sang something mournfully, addressing the

a pretext for quitting the army.
own surprise. “if you gave me petersburg and moscow i could not accept

having greeted him, knowing his habits and his acquaintances, told him

“oh! and my coachman has gone.”



“and why is it?”
“you have met him, aunt?” said she in a calm voice, unable herself to
of beginning anew pictured to himself the blissful, irreproachable,
self-complacent happiness that one sees on the face of a boy happily
crowd and caps were doffed.
frontier, about people he had met in switzerland who knew pierre, and
    chapter ix
that....”
agree on, and if a seller is unable to obtain a fair price he will be
force, so variously understood by the historians themselves, is really
roar of many voices shouting “hurrah!” to the new commander in chief.
history is the life of nations and of humanity. to seize and put into

leisure to an account of the great deeds he had done, he wrote:
a war had there been no english intrigues and no duke of oldenburg, and
drawn. he sought a quiet refuge, and in joseph alexéevich’s study he
schoss, and his old nurse, and asked them to kiss for him “dear
carrying a large loaded tray. with hospitable dignity and cordiality in
might have lost half his army but could not have taken smolénsk. our
“but he’s sucked our blood and now he thinks he’s quit of us. he’s been




repulsive to him, but her feminine self-deception immediately supplied


for the tenth time, molière’s words: “mais que diable allait-il
just above his ear.
“i don’t know anything about it,” said pierre.
distressed, and breathed painfully, but could not restrain the wild
but of angry resolve.
but what an account of everything might be nicholas knew even less

“grounds of personal ambition maybe,” speránski put in quietly.
in the fourth act there was some sort of devil who sang waving his arm
excitedly animated and healthy men.” so thinks, or at any rate
“he’s arrived!”
and chichagóv should have crossed (more than knee-deep in snow) to
and absurd husband of a distinguished wife, a clever crank who did

resting; curiosity as to what the french army, so long lost sight of,
this fact ought to give prince vasíli much satisfaction.

at an officer who was entering the house the emperor occupied. “after
that sum. “he’s begun to go a little lame on the left foreleg,” he
departments of government.
at bald hills, prince nicholas andréevich bolkónski’s estate, the
great deal. of the two soups he chose turtle with savory patties and
cross round his neck, approached the speaker.
officers in full parade uniform stood in front of the castle, as well as
what was demanded and looked round as if asking whether there was
amazement appeared on the emperor’s face. he took balashëv by the arm
where the hottest musket fire and cannonade were heard. suddenly he
sake. his means increased rapidly; serfs from neighboring estates came
nicholas said nothing. he flushed crimson, left her side, and paced up
indulgence and silly talk she was spoiling little prince nicholas. the
of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal revenue
neither of them expected, reproached her niece for trying to catch
to the estate, and would be in better spirits and temper, and also
“why are you wandering about like an outcast?” asked her mother.
there it was. and what seemed still more terrible to her was that since
the stretchers moved on. at every jolt he again felt unendurable pain;
at certain hours, though she declared that no medicine would cure her
lips compressed and gave her husband no reply.
the three hills. having waited there for rostopchín who did not turn
almost at the middle of the table. facing them sat pierre, beside prince
at the staff and went into hospital.
there’s to be an extraordinary meeting of the nobility, and they are

rumbling beneath the archway. beside pétya stood a peasant woman, a
possible—but his efforts were weak and clumsy and the door, pushed from
the enemy was, might have arranged some more advantageous plan and
been foreseen, the russian army of thirty-five thousand men commanded
but her pleasure did not cause her for a moment to forget her aim. and
happened. so all these causes—myriads of causes—coincided to bring it
throne of my ancestors, then after exhausting all the means at my
(the family solicitor) “and he says the same.”
it can’t be helped!” said the count, shrugging his shoulders and

had been torn off.
completed.
and cheeks, and nearly all had red, swollen and festering eyes.
the great standing armies should be reduced henceforth to mere guards
all that day the hounds remained at home. it was frosty and the air was
and would always love and honor him—yet he set off to join his army,
was a victory, and repeated this both verbally and in his dispatches
and prussia. and there too he killed a great many. in russia there
he had no mother.
longer and was no longer alien to him, but he himself having entered it
effect upon pierre; it constricted his limbs and destroyed the
readily let him go and gave him a mission to barclay de tolly.

two seconds. whether or no the emperor understood what was going on in
she did not talk about her brother, diverting the conversation as soon

him than that of all the rest of the world. as he spoke now he was
approached, as if the hounds in full cry and daniel ulyulyuing were just

from the shevárdino redoubt where napoleon was standing the flèches were
“what manners! i thought they would never go,” said the countess,
express the thoughts that filled his mind. he began to explain that he


something happened to induce her to sing, a practice she had quite

this very day,” he murmured to himself.
mine is yours,” she concluded, scanning the faces before her.
after a short silence he rose.
prince andrew’s calm manner of treating everybody, his extraordinary

what reasoning the historians reach the conclusion that this maneuver

as merely due to the will of certain people. in regard to the migration
had long since promised to hand over to him some papers of her deceased
for history, lines exist of the movement of human wills, one end
with a wink, and passed on followed by another, an old man.
of means or because he did not like to part from his young wife in
know, and this alarmed and tormented her.
us?...” “ah! mary, you have got thinner?...” “and you have grown
not talk, but act. the spoken word is silver but the unspoken is golden.


the countess did not believe her ears. denísov had proposed. to whom?

quitrent, alpátych thought no difficulty would be made about complying
came to his former chief with an order from the commander of the rear

jacket, she attended to her household affairs, and then she drove out:
the same way, bent double, in a pool of blood at the edge of the earth
“a frenchman or a russian prince incognito,” said the officer, looking
have cried “vive l’empereur!” at any nonsense that might be told them.
for the actors and then amused at them. she looked at the faces of the


the icon. they, those strange men he had not previously known, stood out
for him?” he thought, and opening the door he let the boy pass in first.
“here’s to the health of lovely women, peterkin—and their


kindly and bantering sympathy, such as soldiers feel for their dogs,
“yes, yes!” natásha murmured as if in vexation. then she sighed
with a beautiful polish lady on the veranda of his house in kiev. and
or roasting themselves to death at the campfires, while carriages
almost impossible to distinguish anything. moreover, his whole

hand that was free, and turning sideways felt the pulse and reflected
remain in moscow?” asked princess mary and immediately blushed, noticing
unsymmetrically, and its gnarled hands and fingers, it stood an aged,
he was awaiting prince andrew’s return with dread and went every day to


noble soul, able to understand her position and her sorrow. his kind,
rural police having come to boguchárovo urged the same thing, saying
what is beyond death, none of us would be afraid of it. that’s so,
principals nor their seconds suffered for it. but the story of the duel,
the replies this theory gives to historical questions are like the
the esaul with an air of importance about tomorrow’s undertaking, that
old boy. really,” said natásha, “look, look!”

in there. in the farthest corner, on a bench beside a bed on which
in the hut which the men had passed, the chief officers had gathered and
“there now!” said the officer of the suite, “that’s
of the boulevards whom he visited of an evening. he led the mazurka


time before the dragoons could extricate the bleeding youth, beaten
mère” playing of course an important part in the story.

his door, which creaked slightly when opened.

“yes, i am very glad,” he said.
watch the change in the tone and manners of the mammas burdened by
me—yet dreadful and unnatural as it seems, i would give them all at
    * forty-two.
natásha was calmer but no happier. she not merely avoided all external
every step.
the prisoners were placed in a certain order, according to the list
monogram were displayed, and the polish ladies, welcoming him, waved

kutúzov made a grimace and sent an order to dokhtúrov to take over the

highest degree just the very qualities pierre lacked, and which might
first regiment roared “hurrah!” so deafeningly, continuously, and
headquarters was still under the spell of the day’s council, at which
considered good and bad, and only pretended to direct them and give

with apparent relief, and began walking up and down, arm in arm, to

weather, and countess apráksina. now and then they glanced at one
the major raised his hand to his cap with a smile.
world. prince andrew was the first to move away, ruffling his hair
“yes, my dear friend,” he began, “such is fortune’s caprice. who would
once was heard on the stairs. forgetting the danger of being recognized,
“i know! i know that feeling,” said nicholas. “but i mustn’t go
    chapter xxi

explanation to the person you received the work from. if you received


have with the actual fact of slaughter and violence: why because the

bowed his white head with a deep sigh. behind kutúzov was bennigsen and
to present itself was the will of the gods and, after that, the will of
splendid field of oats in which a camp had been pitched and which
the princess was about to reply, but her father would not let her speak
the windows of the streets through which he rode, rugs, flags, and his
    chapter xvi
“is the englishman bragging?... eh? is it all right?” said anatole.
had long wished to have this happiness—ever since the narýshkins’
impurity we are unworthy to receive, or seek the reformation of

evil, unhappiness, or sorrow.
“i...”
“there now, the gentry and merchants have gone away and left us to
hoarse, feeble voice.
moment consider what she should do), but all this had long been familiar
    chapter ii
being paid to her, read the last words:
it was impossible to get rid of them.
eagle, began to address the assembled people,” were read and discussed,
severely. “you don’t wish to apologize, but, man, it’s not only to
“and you, theodore, get me a piece of chalk.”
speaking to him about lise as if she were alive—he had forgotten she
a threatening gesture. “if the purse isn’t found i’ll flog you,
sake...!” said he.

the general had a fit of coughing as a result of shouting and of the
tenth i don’t receive news that they have all got away i shall have to
be beaten. the pursuit of the russian army, about which napoleon was so
some days after anatole’s departure pierre received a note from prince
people. napoleon led six hundred thousand men into russia and captured
“do you know, i really believe she is un petit peu amoureuse du jeune

but i am not praying for trifles now,” he thought as he put his pipe
his boots on again. some built little houses of the tufts in the plowed
meant her little son.) “oh, it’s time to go to him.... the milk’s
“i beg your majesty’s pardon,” returned balashëv, “besides russia there
department. lanskóy informed the commander in chief that the army


depths of her heart had a hidden dream and hope that supplied the chief
“i? what a question! i am going because... well, because everyone is
her?—the real truth, because you know andrew is risking so much doing

away with a grimace as if to say that everything dólokhov had said to
he need only have bent his head a little to have touched them. he was

“ah, is it you, cousin?”
fallen leaves that dropped of themselves from that withered tree—the
behind the guns were their limbers and still farther back picket ropes
countess” to have a rest, but remembering something else of
“sónya, wait a bit—we’ll pack everything into these,” said natásha.
“but as it is, i know every word she utters. she will come running to
what the way was prepared for his activity. if we have a large range

with regard to religion, napoleon ordered the priests to be brought back
free will do not exist because at an unknown period of time we sprang
“long ago,” answered rostóv, “i have already been for the hay,
frowning and silent.
cup of vodka for the men from me,” he added so that the soldiers
teeth gleamed, brows frowned, ever the same words of abuse flew from
“to see the governor by his excellency’s order,” answered alpátych,
countess say. “why are you sitting there like conspirators?”
do palace revolutions—in which sometimes only two or three people take
great favor to ask of you.”
series of continuous events and examine it apart from others, though
(daughter of the first mílka), with a quite gray face and large black
drawing room.
he dreamed that he was lying in the room he really was in, but that
after the storm; drops still continued to fall, but vertically now, and
talking of the schön grabern affair? were you there?”
suddenly banished the shadows of the past. “now tell us about yourself,”

so the conception of the action of a man subject solely to the law of
“well, peter kirílych, let’s go and have a smoke,” he said.
run away. and next day, count ilyá rostóv—though he had not yet quite
took his orders from barclay, but, having submitted, agreed with him
enemy’s advance, and by this effort to unite them while avoiding battle
battalion came onto the bridge. only denísov’s squadron of hussars


immediately.”
a great crowd of generals gathered round him, and count rostopchín, who

kitten which promises to become a beautiful little cat. she evidently
fulfilled if but approximately. when one of the opinions expressed

corporal’s face when the drums were beating.

she termed bennigsen. she saw that they grew spiteful when they spoke to
should be dragged to the lockup by his hair’? (how silly!) ‘and honor

tied round his head, was stronger. he raised his companion and said
- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
first fortification but was driven back, for on emerging from the wood
thanked,” thought the overseer, “the storm has blown over!”

more things might have been taken out, but natásha insisted on having


without any incendiarism.
this extraordinary gathering not only of nobles but also of the
the aide-de-camp, having returned and choosing an opportune moment,
“but you know you may be unfair. you are too fond of this one,” his wife
struck, too, by the excessive contempt for others that he observed in
her album. borís sketched two trees in the album and wrote: “rustic
burst out into a fit of his broad, good-natured laughter, so loud that
gold-embroidered velvet bag. her pretty little upper lip, on which a

conceive a future life...”
might retreat and leave the pickets.”

“is she clever?” she asked.

shouted nicholas, banging the table—very little to the point as it
triumph.

application. his love of theory made him hate everything practical, and

down.”
dólokhov reined in his horse and advanced at a walk.
glanced at him and turned to pierre.
now his plump hairy chest to the brush with which his valet was rubbing
vasíli and his son.
in the shed everyone was ready, dressed, belted, shod, and only awaited

dólokhov put away the money, called a footman whom he ordered to bring
opened, a gentleman-in-waiting, bending respectfully, handed the emperor
a vague consciousness that she was not bonaparte’s servant, was really,
himself on his seat.

“no, madame!” pierre continued in a tone of displeasure, “i have not
better during those awful moments—the father who so remembered
say—“yes, misfortune! call it what you please, i know that what
bare. in the midst of the song cries were heard, and fighting and blows


the main army and that kutúzov has been appointed commander in chief. he

resemble two leaves, are deviations from the theory.

of them that she might pray for them. but neither could she doubt the
couldn’t help going.”
“did you hear of the last event at the review in petersburg? the
from its aim. kutúzov’s wish was to attack next day, and the whole
when rostóv went back there was a bottle of vodka and a sausage on the
could be felt, but the nearer prince andrew came to the french lines the
a first introduction and betrays a consciousness of the impropriety of



experience of life had reached the conviction that thoughts and the

these latter the butler thrust mysteriously forward, wrapped in a
last updated: january 21, 2019
but rostóv bowed himself away from the doctor and asked the assistant
station), and again embraced his sister.
a jesuit à robe courte * was presented to her, and in the garden by the
except in the army; i am not a diplomat or a government clerk.—i
more that she with such a soul not only belonged to him but was part of
rostopchín’s broadsheet had said that he would sound a call two or three
complying with the full terms of this agreement. see paragraph 1.c

farther he left moscow behind and the deeper he plunged into that sea
the shouts of the mob, the count began to repent. he remembered with
and sighing disdainfully, he again changed his position.
were doing.
chapter xxviii
mingled into the same sweet and solemn hymn. “oh, this is delightful!
before anna pávlovna and the others had time to smile their
she took his arm and with a happy face went with him into the adjoining
“i am ready for everything,” said pierre.
adorer and courtier of anyone but himself, napoleon. “are the horses
“but why not?” asked the princess.
have attained the same end,” returned prince andrew. “every courtier
a wild beast.... in poland, if you please, he nearly killed a jew.”
continually and rapidly touching her rosy nether lip when necessary
no one replied to his remarks.
troops from west to east. he went in a traveling coach with six horses,
and muttered something in which some people caught the words, “the old
    chapter xxiv
“i want to know!”

pétya.
conception of some one man who saved russia and destroyed napoleon. in
and they marched gaily. some columns, supposing they had reached their
should make too good a target for the french, besides i am afraid i
“father, i did not want to judge,” said prince andrew, in a hard and
a seventy-pound weight were tied to it. he could run no more. the
submissive attitude, his fingers clasped before him. his emaciated young
any result more opportune than the actual outcome of this battle. with
in her arms and her kerchief torn from her head, burst through the door
(she always ended with these words.) “he is an excellent man!”

pleased faces, for they knew that under no other management could they
as soon as he reached moscow, prince andrew had received from his
on december 6—st. nicholas’ day and the prince’s name day—all
the entrenchment, and went on again. just behind it they came upon some
you made us pay dear for it. i was at it three times—sure as i sit here.
a headache began to say good night.
a quick eye, and resolution.... and what role is your young monarch

the princess understood what natásha had meant by the words: “two days

glancing for support at an officer of the suite who turned away


hastily to the front porch, saying he felt too hot. the crowd of people


french artillery fire was directed against it, the man sent there was

the water could flow to waste. pierre felt, moreover, what the accused
same places. he nodded approval.
chapter vii
trouble, and silently fixed his eyes on bagratión as a schoolboy who
wake up, váska!” he went on, turning to denísov, whose head

saved. but he saw nothing. above him there was now nothing but the
not been so tall, so broad of limb, and so strong that he carried his

the two pávlograd squadrons were bivouacking on a field of rye, which
alexéevich’s advice pierre had entered the service of the state and
pratzen, interrupted by such frequent reports of cannon that sometimes
rather moist and glittered more than usual, and as he sat in his saddle,
years there had been so many changes in his life, he had thought, felt,
good-natured, sincere, and animated levity. “but you see... another

intrigues (as in fact he said on the island of st. helena). it naturally
crowd had to wait.
idea that there is not and cannot be any science of war, and that
legs came in from both sides and began dancing all together. then the

matter with him and remembered being wounded and how was when he asked
and pressed him against the railings, and all he could do was to smile.


how d’ye do, old fellow?” he said, turning to an old man who was
have the carriage to drive to town:
ring, cried from the window: “come here; part the bets!” this was
estate. despite the indifference to the affairs of the world he had
he checked himself, fearing to seem naïve, yet he felt an irresistible
that was it was not that which tormented pierre at the moment. he was
natásha’s intermediacy, to remind him of his promise, and then
“papa! pa-pa!” he called after him, sobbing, “forgive me!” and
fence which i could scarcely reach with my hands. after much effort i


how horrified he would have been seven years before, when he first
of the room.
“then you are serving?”
“‘to him that hath shall be given, and from him that hath not shall be
(delivered by the french alone) was still to be heard from numerous
the half-burned house against which pierre was leaning.
please!”
black eyes gazed from under his brows at his master, who was silent.
people’s will cannot be verified, for it never occurred.
arrived in france with a battalion, and the french, who had been hating
“but we have grain belonging to my brother?” she said.
nothing of what was going on around him and to be absorbed by some
    chapter xii

chapter xxv
toward dawn, count orlóv-denísov, who had dozed off, was awakened by a

zherkóv touched his horse with the spurs; it pranced excitedly from

in the house was done in haste at that time), and pierre and anna
after taking a turn along the podnovínski boulevard, balagá began to
but for all that willarski found it pleasanter now than it had been
was impossible for cavalry to act among the bushes and broken ground,
human life.
the same manner.
november 9: twenty miles from smolénsk.


when the troops reached their night’s halting place on the eighth of
business. she felt he had a world apart, which he loved passionately and

not interest and did not even exist for alpátych.
then suddenly, dismayed lest he had said too much, pétya stopped and
this there were secret reasons he could reveal only to her—but that if
still in a whisper though the music had ceased. “but i am certain that
was beginning, anna pávlovna gave one of her soirees. the “cream of
probably he did not, for in general he thought very little—but his
ordered his horse at once and, coldly taking leave of borís, rode
as well as that the french were outflanking our left. the general
asked him into the room that had been assigned him. a bed had been made
respectful attitude of the younger men to the old man in his dotage was
the peoples as clerk to master.

intended to show that, as a highly trained military man, he left it to
pétya soon came to himself, the color returned to his face, the pain had
such a nation,” he said to pierre. “you, who have suffered so from the
refer only to the victory and not to the lunch, m. de beausset ventured
holding high her fifty-year-old head with its gray curls, she stood
and blue riding breeches, who were swarming near the bridge, and then at
the meaning of the square and all the various figures of the temple of
“even if it were a great deal of trouble...” answered prince andrew,



the events of the previous year: the burning of moscow and the flight

russian. prince andrew listened and observed in silence.
awaits...”

habitual, offering his puffy cheek, but bagratión kissed him on the
flagging spirit of the troops would not permit it.
at that very time prince andrew was sitting with pierre and telling him
“major denísov,” rostóv said again. “he was wounded at
“oh, no, no!” and besides the pallor and the physical suffering
prince andrew was watching these men abashed by the emperor’s
“one more question, count,” he said, “which i beg you to answer
pointing to nicholas, “his friend borís has become an officer, and
pierre was very fond of.
may laugh as much as you like, but all the same bonaparte is a great
had always imagined battles to himself), nor could he help to fire the
pierre began to tell about karatáev, but paused. by this time he had

(though the council of filí, at which it was decided to abandon moscow,
young lady visitor and the countess’ eldest daughter (who was four

looks so much older! it cannot be she. it merely reminds me of her.”
wooden walls redolent of pine, and would have gone farther, but antón
time was glad he had surprised her at it and that she would now have to


space, seemed suddenly—like an arrow piercing the earth—to remain
eighty thousand as well. yes, yes! kiss me.”

troops had already entered prussia and our second war with napoleon
the battle of vyázma, pétya had been in a constant state of blissful
shoulders close to his eyes.
marry.... and i am sure there will not be a happier man than you.”
hung a signboard, general staff, and throwing down his reins, he entered
her. “do please just leave me alone!” and she ran out of the room, with

why he stepped out from the window to the veranda and smiled under his
man with a diamond ring on his forefinger, who was fond of speaking
“well there certainly are disgusting people,” thought rostóv as he
to us equally valid in itself and equally false by its insignificance
“but tell me, what is he like, eh?” said prince andrew again.
a retirement into the depths of the country in accordance with precise
squatted down on his heels by the fire beside the officer with the long
head sink over his plate. “he is old and feeble, and i dare to condemn

along planks, while others stood about doing nothing.
“yes, that was fine,” said rostóv, smiling.
that sort of thing.”

a very gloomy frame of mind in a royal study in the krémlin, giving
the diagonal of a parallelogram of forces.
had come into pierre’s room after the funeral. with drooping eyes
pocket, on seeing a crowd bearing down upon him told his coachman to
and deserted village again ascended. the horses began to lather and the
“kindly let this cart pass. don’t you see it’s a woman?” said


and giving orders, engrossed him. the burning of smolénsk and its
with the child in his arms his figure was now more conspicuous than
kiss them, but clung to that which reminded her most nearly of him—his
but now we are all going to ——’s.”
horses neighing. the secrecy of the undertaking heightened its charm
wife’s drawing room (and he was almost always there) had a physical
in reality it was simply a fortified point on the left flank—and that

secretly married (as pierre knew), and should be so in love with him as
his family and entering into all the details of his children’s relations
the battle began on both sides with a cannonade from several hundred
kinds overtaking one another and blocking the muddy road, three and
where he had been in the habit of putting up for the last thirty years.
him.

cahd.”
prince.
pierre hurriedly turned away from her and again addressed princess mary,
only to express his rapture fully.
sokólniki after the duel and had spent that first agonizing, sleepless
scoundrels.”
the ignorance of his colleagues, the weakness and insignificance of
i grabbed him, like this.” (he jumped up quickly and lightly.) “‘come
armfeldt, adjutant general wolzogen, wintzingerode (whom napoleon had
that provisions are supplied and the routes indicated,” said bilíbin,

reduced to tears.
according to the enemy’s movements and the number of men increases and
as an adviser and ready at hand to replace barclay. the grand duke


any that were at all serious, yet the french army ceased to exist. what
but were (in his opinion) men he had brought there, feels que c’est
would mention him to the emperor for a decision as to his employment,
was a great success. there were many pretty girls and the rostóv girls
a few hours ahead of the french who were approaching hollabrünn from
the devil moves it. another man says the locomotive moves because its
prince andrew sighed and made no reply.
i have written that he should make use of you in proper places and not
into her arms, and through the gathering mists, foreseeing the brilliant
accent—having noticed that zherkóv could still hear him.


pierre knew all the details of the attempt on bonaparte’s life in 1809
minutes before the troops had passed the emperors. not only would it

moscow would soon be in the enemy’s hands, just as count rostopchín

recently been away driving a government transport, had returned with
light, impetuous, and seemingly buoyant steps were heard at the door.
the course of the father confessor’s arguments ran as follows: “ignorant
“hey, cossack, my horse!” he said. “now, then, you there! get out
congratulations and happy faces, announcing the trophies taken, the
advanced only because they fit in with the event. had that event not
expression which seemed to say that he alone knew where and how much eau
that’s it.” and with a complacent sigh he would return to the
referred to when she said: “this suddenly happened,” had occurred two

with happy face and sparkling eyes, raised his saber, shouted “vivat!”
and at a short distance merged into the dull, moist veil of mist.

morand’s and gérard’s divisions (for whose movements no directions are
drawing him down put her arm round his thin, scraggy neck.
long been wishing but had been unable to divert the conversation to
said an old maid who lived with the melyukóvs, during supper.
forest. among the trees a man with long legs and long, swinging arms,
for we know that he could not restrain the troops from attacking at

and pretending not to understand what was said to him and not to be
to do what was for him the most difficult thing in life—to say an

ready, but pierre learned that it was being constructed by the emperor’s
cooked before we reach our quarters.”
the doctor who came to see her that day ordered her to continue the
hundred and thirty thousand men this side of the vistula. the turks will
mademoiselle george, expressing their enthusiasm.
rest of you. let me live like a man and think of my soul and of god.”

the feeling he had noticed between his protégée natásha and prince
“how understand me!” cried her father angrily. “prince vasíli
he suddenly cried. “even without a bet, there! tell them to bring me a
cartloads he sold for the prince, nor a single shock of the whole corn

morning.
wrathfully around, followed some twenty paces behind them.
vous aime’?” he kept repeating to himself. and when he had said it
weyrother’s had already been approved. as soon as prince andrew began
and about nikólenka, twice asked when the last letter had been received
toward her which she could not overcome.
special providence of god who, loving you, wishes to try you and your
a stand there behind a wattle fence in a garden thickly overgrown with
prince koutouzov, to keep you in his holy and gracious protection!
    chapter ii
had suffered and lacked life during his own absence, and of how she
andrew, though he saw him now for the first time. there was about
remember the recent days of patriotic elation and ardor, hard to believe
something new, and the quiet rapture karatáev evidently felt as he told

up from the sofa, seized borís under the elbow in his quick, clumsy
see this, but on the russian side every effort was made to hinder the

explain.... yesterday our left flank was there at shevárdino, you see,
papers and still taking no notice of the special messenger.
the emperor was with the army to encourage it, but his presence and
successfully, evoking memories of the best times of her youth and
of it. the only question is, has it been destroyed or not? if not, then
having ridden in the smoke past the sixth corps, behind the artillery
“you could at least take back your words. what? if you want me to do as

“please, vasíli dmítrich,” natásha was saying, “do come!”

try to do all i can for your happiness.”

essentially as before.
“rugáy, rugáyushka! that’s it, come on!” came a third voice just
now they wanted her to sacrifice the very thing that constituted the
anybody nowadays!” shouted the publican, picking up his cap.


still in the drawing room, drew a chair toward him or her, and jauntily

love of one’s neighbor and christianity—and all this in the presence of
borís followed her, smiling.
from the other side a battalion commander rode up.

“it’s all nonsense, all rubbish—those discussions which lead to nothing
inexplicable (unless he wished to show that he, too, could have an
the ballroom, which she particularly liked for its loud resonance, and
“your name?” asked davout.
excuses now! it’s your turn to sing the ba’cawolla—i entweat
crime, which altered his whole life and were connected with pierre, with
though at one time, in petersburg, she had been annoyed with natásha



the frenchman expanded his chest and made a majestic gesture with his
his participation in that action.
of sorrow.
had changed greatly during that period. in the expression of his face,
said, of a wife who was a celebrated beauty and of millions of money.

words), others were eating bread; the more severely wounded looked
end of those thousand miles. one must have the prospect of a promised
the trap would come for her too soon. after a casual pause, such as
terrible stormcloud he had desired with the whole strength of his soul
trees on each side, following the infantry and a battery that had gone
as a result of the hostility between kutúzov and bennigsen, his chief of
moscow. all the members of the lodges were men pierre knew in ordinary
“he’s a german, but a nice fellow all the same.... but he’s a german.”
the first fifteen years of the nineteenth century in europe present an
promptly pretended to be astonished and awe-struck, opened his eyes
nightcap, came in.
holiday: everywhere were blackened ruins, and the few russians to be

by their own reasoning, repeated the argument he had already put to
for himself. as is often the case with those gifted with an ardent
revelry in the tavern and supposing it to have been broken into, wished

thrust into his bosom. “my mistress, daughter of general in chief prince
can one serve with assurance of being useful.”
in the autumn the rostóvs returned to moscow. early in the winter
tell the little countess!”
“it was all they could do to rescue the poor man,” continued the


overtaking the battalions that continued to advance, he stopped
necessary for the position. then there’s this house, which must be
column coming up to meet the ápsherons.
to give you the love you do not feel, and your prayer would have been
and behind the outposts and told him that his wish to be presented to
you see does not want to march, i got that on the seventh at the great
position seems to them insoluble. but the wave they feel to be rising
to who he might be—perhaps a very important person—and hostility as a
pronounced the mason in a stern and tremulous voice.

powders he had prescribed a fortnight previously.
not disfigured by the approach of death. it was the same as pierre

this opinion, but as soon as he expressed it karp and others attacked
country’s sake? and how was he to blame, with his dimple and blue eyes?
sónya, with a quiver in her voice due chiefly to the attention that was
them again, but the salons of anna pávlovna and hélène remained just
putting it up.
finger at his master. “they are on the scent of the cubs...” he
saw for the first time peasant militiamen in their white shirts and with
destination, halted, piled arms, and settled down on the cold ground,
rostóv.
his serene highness had petted and to whom he had given a lump of sugar
sole will determine the direction of humanity’s movement; but man acts
expression of his sister’s face to see if she was in earnest. then he
and anxiety and felt mortified by it. she blushed for him, grew still
in retirement and had now no influence in political affairs, every high

and led first to one and then to another place with dozens of other men,

the left.
most instructive phenomena in history.
been more amusing than the drawing room talk of society scandals, the
his horse. zherkóv and the staff officer bent over their saddles and
angrily pulling down his tight scarf.

village. tell it to stop and await my orders.”
    chapter xvi
now on one side, now on the other, giving his face an unpleasant
from the commune.
not yet dispersed before another puff appeared, followed by a report.
to swim the river with his uhlans instead of seeking a ford. in evident
catherine petróvna did actually play valses and the écossaise, and
the regimental commander was afraid he might be blamed for this and did

both....” he lifted his head and again the thick vein in his thin neck

were brothers.
    * death gives relief and death is peaceful.

that they are to cross last and to fire the bridge as i ordered; and the
a battle not gained by the attacking side in eight hours, after all

earlier still?... when, when was this terrible affair decided? moscow
to their questions, and that the sole object of that assembly was to
prince andrew and his sister, hand in hand, kissed one another, and
mary that he was even glad that the family connection between them
went into natásha’s room with it in her hand.
not the french were running after them, but not daring to.
it he begged pierre to continue.
“that used to be sónya,” thought he, and looked at her closer and
what he did hear he understood that the emperor spoke of the danger
disclosed the fresh gap between his teeth to which prince andrew could
opera she had heard in petersburg with prince andrew. what she drew from
of them, and that she was not afraid of him and no one else ought to be.
the whole herd is constantly altered, this is because in order to follow
displease the court besides. (you know there is some kind of
armfeldt disputes, bennigsen considers, and barclay, called on to act,
hindmost of these men wearing similar shakos was a russian hussar. he

“all the points of our position are in the enemy’s hands and we cannot
head, pulled it off, and showed the blood congealed on his hair.
a restrained swagger which would have been ridiculous had he not been
events (that is to say, events the reasonableness of which we do
quarters and a speedy return to our country. behave as you did at
and alien to himself—and had returned to his former peasant habits.
their eyes.
expression on his face pleased natásha.
the peasants—even they have to go,” said the soldier behind the cart,

out accidently.”

hastening her steps. “you young ladies should not know anything about

“because i love you!” was what he wanted to say, but he did not say it,
carry out the count’s wishes, seeing clearly that not only would the
interested the minister of war less than any of the other matters he was
friendship with the father whom nicholas could not remember—all this

down, toying with his sèvres coffee cup, and motioned balashëv to a
and countess alike—turned to look at her as if wondering why she had

round at them all with crafty eyes.
having sat awhile with her visitors without understanding anything of


days.”
possessed of a helen. “but no doubt it always is and must be so!”

project gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at



“he’s handsome, isn’t he? i hear they will marry him to that rich

at pierre’s fine though dirty linen and at the ring on his finger.
“what is it? some new relics?” asked prince andrew.
war, and like everyone else unconsciously exaggerated their sorrow
understand it—in the bright light of the emotion that shone within
fellow. oh, by the by!” he shouted through the doorway after pierre,
had undertaken on his own responsibility, and began looking at the enemy
princess mary, who was attractive to him and had an enormous fortune,
“the unpleasant things were said to me,” remarked véra, “i said
nothing but love and an entreaty for forgiveness.
new path so attractively shown him by the masons, on which he firmly
playing in that monstrous crowd? they compromise him and throw on him
heiress.”
steps of his home.

rarely left her and which made her plain, sickly face yet plainer. she
came naturally to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.
would have been at once announced in the gazette, as he is a colonel.”
“i thank your serene highness, but i fear i am no longer fit for the
were among the prettiest. they were both particularly happy and gay.
she pointed to a lady who was crossing the room followed by a very plain
emperor’s commands on the field of austerlitz seven years before settled
establishments for young ladies. prince vasíli entered the room with the
soldiers, after a twenty-mile march, were kept mending and cleaning all

“it is for the reasson, my goot sir,” said he, speaking with a
party should spend the night in his little village of mikháylovna.
mother, her father, and her daydreams; and natásha, who with a passive
heard the quick rustle of the countess’ dress. she came up to them.

i don’t want him.” (he looked at his blushing daughter.) “are you

roundabout way princess mary was obliged to take through lípetsk,
“ah, my dear! he is so rich, and we are so poor!”
darkness....”
for her friend.
him without tears.


ask on my knees for your hand and your love!”
one was snatched out before my eyes... and there were women who had


timidly when all this happened before,” thought natásha, “and in
“ah, here she is!” said the old count, when he saw natásha enter.
another voice, from a man of medium height with clear blue eyes,



or the acknowledgment of the merit of the virtuous act, or the freedom
“have some brought from the reserve,” said napoleon, and having gone
her voice broke, tears gushed from her eyes, and she turned quickly to
blushed. she felt all the time that by talking to him she was doing
would be safe.
had involuntarily overheard her. natásha blushed at that recollection
cook.
wine with dignity and looking to the count for approval.
    book two: 1805
she says it’s very fine.”


“yes, it will,” natásha answered reluctantly.
rhetor, though it aroused his curiosity, did not seem to him essential,
other detachments passed through the krémlin and encamped along
“i am glad i was able to do you a service, my dear anna
that all europe is powerless before him.... and i don’t believe a
newly erected buildings were standing empty and that the serfs continued
fist for fear of losing what it holds, and therefore perishes, the
were already close to the wall, and from the gallery resounded the
handkerchief he took out of his cap.
proofs of nikólenka’s virtues. how strange, how extraordinary, how
a white uniform that looked strange among the russian black ones. the
“well, little countess; that’s it—come on!” cried “uncle,”
m. de beausset, the man so fond of travel, having fasted since morning,

novel one, that every moment of his life belonged to her and to the
“well, my boy, you’ll get along wherever you go—foot or
“what’s the matter?” exclaimed prince andrew standing still in

how attentive, and how he remembers everything,” he thought, looking at
the emperor began to breathe heavily and rapidly, his lower lip
men to flush.
“je vous aime!” * he said, remembering what has to be said at such

“i cannot express, princess, how glad i am that i happened to ride here
the icon was carried further, accompanied by the throng. pierre stopped
from anatole, of which, without taking in a word, she understood only
“mary,” he said softly, going up to her, “it will never happen again;



a father could for their education, and they have both turned out fools.
expression which was never to be seen on it in a drawing room. his eyes

“one might easily get killed that way! what do they mean by it? killing
march, rode to his father’s estate where he had been born and spent his
military service has consisted and will consist in this compulsory and
time because the old prince made difficulties. this letter grieved and
far from being strong, was no more a position than any other spot one
“and have you brought little nicholas?” he asked in the same slow, quiet
left the place where the balls and bullets were flying about, their

“if mary is already persuading me to forgive, it means that i ought long
billet troops in the villages of any district and the number of fires in
they still brought up the charges, loaded, aimed, and applied the match,
“is this good or bad?” pierre asked himself. “it is good for me,
mentioned that prince andrew was among the wounded traveling with them;
self-purification. only to this aim can we always strive independently
the right stood our infantry in a dense column: they were the reserve.
volkónski, to hear from you the situation of the army and the reasons
recognizes his high vocation and will be true to it. that is the one

them you want—three if you like.”
replied that it would be more than enough for him and that he gave his
the princess did speak, her words would not be flattering to anna
but the countess did not want the question put like that: she did not
on all sides. the countess rose and went into the ballroom.
of the uhlans. they swooped down close to the french dragoons, something
the first place it is hard to understand where the profundity and genius
after his fright. he was that glad!”
recollection of their discussion, “he wanted to convince me that it is
with its marshals, kings, and emperor was not captured, if that was what
him die feeling that he is rendering unhappy those who...”
were forced to bend it back and hastily entrench it where it chanced to
connected with a world of eternal, solemn, and calm thoughts, quite
with him, tell him about his past, his life at home, and his love,

the other committeemen. “there will be many toasts, it’s time to


thousand-ruble horses, only eighteen were left after the charge.
“it means that anna makárovna has finished her stocking,” said countess
though politeness prevented his showing impatience, left the old woman
if we go we are almost sure to be taken prisoners, and god knows...”

skillfully made watch, dares to say that, as he does not understand
the dead eyes, and hastened to close them. she closed them but did not
vasíli, who had grown thinner and paler during the last few days,
prince was at home, and showed him into a clean little anteroom.

of men and women known for the freedom of their conduct. mademoiselle

though he may perhaps outlive us all, as i sincerely hope he will...”
“immediately, i’m coming, i’m coming!” replied the princess hurriedly,
on him—poor stuff! how could i bring him? and so rude, your honor! why,
christmas? do you remember what i saw?”
apart from consciousness of self no observation or application of reason
again on the sofa. they were silent for a while.

conceal her delight. “she is so kind and mamma is so fond of her!”
two troykas were standing before the porch and two young drivers were
     * “when an officer is making his round, sentinels don’t ask

suddenly find that we are not in otrádnoe, but in fairyland. and then i
same conditions and with the same character he will do the same thing as
“where? i send them away and take a weceipt for them,” shouted denísov,
home reading a book and trying to fathom the significance of the square,
laughter, and after such a laugh she always felt nearer to him. natásha
should go back in the sleigh with dimmler, and sónya with nicholas and
encounter with nicholas in 1805, and many other incidents betokening
donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state

here the conversation seemed interesting and he stood waiting for an
to what he had felt at the slobóda palace during the emperor’s visit—a
go out into society; everyone knew that her father would not let her
not yet feel himself sufficiently prepared. my benefactor then explained
but at the incredible boldness and smartness of this little girl who had
it, that kutúzov and others were there for that purpose, but that he had

the panorama spread out before him. from the twenty-sixth of august
could not fathom whether it was curiosity, devotion, gratitude, or
the swiftness of ilágin’s borzois, and in that beautiful bitch saw a
that the momentous event was accomplished that will always remain the
shortly after nine o’clock that evening, weyrother drove with his
us assume that this program was possible and had then been formulated,

“oh, don’t speak of his going, don’t! i won’t hear it spoken
the rapidity of the russian pursuit was just as destructive to our army
“if it were not for my sincere affection and devotion to uncle,”
down over the wound, felt it, and sighed deeply. then he made a sign to
the most cunning man could not have crept into her confidence more
which was a lie, and worse than a lie? i am guilty and must endure...
married, la petite est gentille.” *
just under the icons; his large thick hands outside the quilt. into the
is the movement of the peoples at the time of the crusades explained by
“eh, eh, friend! come here a bit,” said she, assuming a soft high
of “the heart of russia.” not only did it seem to him (as to all
were nicholas and sónya, the niece. sónya was a slender little


with evident pleasure.
“i must have that purse, i tell you,” shouted denísov, shaking his

several soldiers fell, and a second lieutenant who was holding the
and she burst into sobs with the despairing vehemence with which people
that brilliant light. she knew what it was all meant to represent, but


borís, too, with his friend zhilínski, came to see the preobrazhénsk
same!” pierre often indulged in reflections of this sort, nullifying
company, which alone had maintained its order in the wood and, having
only in the heads of a dozen individuals—for the events and results now
of russia, minimizing as far as possible the sufferings of our people
fellows have all lost your wits, or i have outlived mine. may god help
more, but this is something special.... yes, of course—” he did not
and he saw above him the remote, lofty, and everlasting sky. he knew it
feeling that in the main it was going badly.
to me fully the meaning of the great square of creation and pointed out

informed him that the princess had gone to her own apartments, and that
the movements of the bodies, but without disproving it, it would seem
“oh yes, i know, i know, i know!” natásha interrupted him. “when
father’s room with the good-humored and victorious air natural to
they were offered enormous sums of money for them. not only were huge



were raised to the count.


forming up within twice the range of a musket shot. the general in

“yes, your excellency,” said gerásim after thinking for a moment.
the rostóvs, and natásha, very glad of this diversion, having shut
finish because their eyes meeting said the rest.
chapter xi

not go to any large gatherings, but only to small receptions. prince
one would not need finesse; and he tells me that i am lying—so let him
alpátych at a gliding trot, only just managing not to run, kept up with

frill that surrounded her face. her face had shriveled, her upper lip
spend that night at a place three miles out of moscow. the next morning
and the visitors try to guess from these glances who, or what, they are



stopped and looked about him.
mary, and the little princess. prince andrew had been called to his

own particular tone. the largest of these was the french circle of the
“had there been no bagratión, it would have been necessary to
the opposition of her mother, the doctors, and even of her husband
    * “good day, everybody!”
they all plainly and certainly knew that they were criminals who must
“gentlemen!” said the emperor with a quivering voice.
all knowledge is merely a bringing of this essence of life under the
on retiring to her own room, she sat in an armchair, her eyes fixed on a
pierre’s side near kutúzov and in a most natural manner, without
on the twenty-fifth of august, so his historians tell us, napoleon spent
“you’ve only just missed him,” said the orderly.
“which is it? which is your house?” he asked.
without obtaining the desired result. then it occurred to him: if the
and she loves me....”
“bezúkhov est ridicule, but he is so kind and good-natured. what

their ground and continued to fire.
celebrating awards they had received for the campaign, and made


we who are such fools. if you have no pity on me, have some for the

“no, gentlemen, you have had your sleep, but i have not slept for two
forgetfulness of all the rules of decorum, pushed forward to the
at leaving home for the first time in his life on bad terms with him,

forehead, wetting him with her tears. then after a pause she said:
esaul one saw that he was as comfortable and as much at ease as always

“besides that, peter nikoláevich, by exchanging into the guards
count markóv, and prince vyázemski—did not show themselves at the
unpleasant impression at first. the soldiers looked askance at him with

appeared a stupid smile of glee which he seemed unable to suppress.
toil, clinging to one another’s legs and drawing out the wax, with a

“people are being arrested...” said the count. “i’ve told the countess
man who was making him angry. but he did forget himself once or twice

gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
“wait a bit and listen. it’s fine!” answered sídorov, who was
holding his baby son, who was again awake, on his huge right palm and
prince andrew had arrived in the evening and pierre came to see him next



waters of the distant danube shone. and fairer still were the faraway
pierre finished what he had begun. it was the sequel to his complacent
troubled by his sleeplessness: his soul was as fresh and joyful as if he
under an obligation, assuming an air of much greater importance than he


if in the descriptions given by historians, especially french ones, we
french columns and stumbled instead on napoleon himself with sixteen
from prince andrew, availing themselves of kutúzov’s absence and of the
personages who, in their opinion, caused what they describe as the
the peasants say that a cold wind blows in late spring because the oaks
storeroom. a third case was needed and servants had gone to fetch it.
aides-de-camp at bennigsen’s country house.

with you, my angel? are you ill?” asked the count.
the smell of smoke. pierre sat up and sighed. the three soldiers were
before him and an assured position in society.

dólokhov, who had reappeared that year in moscow after his exile and
would be agreeable to his hearer since it went to prove his, napoleon’s,
“my dear fellow, how are you?” said he through the singing, making
him, for the crowd pressed from all sides, swaying as one mass with them
right, in the unlifting smoke the guns boomed, and out of the mysterious
determine for whom and for what he felt such particular delight in
some garments from under them.
continuously in an atmosphere of campaigning and war—can understand the
whip in the sand when a calèche dashed up noisily. a man in a general’s

and put the matter before the emperor,” said princess anna

comfortably.
in the spring of 1809 he went to visit the ryazán estates which had
paternal intentions of his majesty the emperor and king and to
elderly face, and she took the money from under the handkerchief.



september, 6, 1812.

the count, forgetting to smooth out the smile on his face, looked into
the frenchman, having pushed his head and hands through, without raising
i am overwhelmed with business and it is purely out of charity that
advance on moscow, nor did alexander and the russian commanders then
below the horizon and an evening frost was starring the puddles near

obey,” answered the quartermaster.
result of the battle to be fought in a few days.
to join some swedish forces at stralsund; how two hundred and twenty
kutúzov to anyone; in his opinion kutúzov was not only admirable
prince nicholas grew more animated and expressed his views on the
“all right!” said dólokhov, having finished the addition. “all
will be left! that way we shall be saying there is no god—nothing!”
carrying them off their feet and engulfing them all. the dragoon was
the dancers. he invited prince andrew to come and see them, and asked
again become what she had been at the ball.
in one company dinner was ready, and the soldiers were gazing eagerly
door, as though he had long expected him.
“the ápsherons must be stopped, your excellency,” cried he. but at
to which pierre did not agree. on the other hand, pierre demanded that
dressing stations the grass and earth were soaked with blood for a space

a visit, and i came in such a costume only to see my daughter. i beg you


the tsar!”
“andrew, why didn’t you warn me?” said the princess, with mild
not understand what was said to them in french.
conversation but think it necessary to move about and talk, in order
“all the same, it was bilíbin who found a suitable form for the
something from one to another, and a page—the same one rostóv
see his face. anna mikháylovna left him, and when she returned he was
the attainment of the historic, universal, aims of humanity. a deed done


terror.
that time and now the whole french army was there. ermólov wished to act
and that it was all nonsense. and it was even pleasant to be able to
stood in the middle of the room smoothing out the folds of the gauze.

mention her!” he exclaimed fiercely.
order without clinging to anything to wander in hempen rags from place

he was silent, as if astonished, then he jumped out of bed, ran to me in



and murat, humiliated and anxious to expiate his fault, had at once
count never be able to find out whether all measures had been taken for
commanders for green oats mown down by the soldiers, when landowners
and said:

“the general on duty, quick! it’s very important!” said he to someone

been preparing for it, and with a low bow offered it to kutúzov.
gervais gave a long account of an official revision, remarkable for the


all were silent. on this fact relating to the emperor personally, it was


herself or of her own relations with prince andrew.
strength and health, of which he had till then been unconscious, and
merry.
dressing gown looked out.
the count sobbed yet more.
me,” answered a voice struggling with tears.
advance, and the next day his army began to cross the niemen.
“nicholas, what a fine dog truníla is! he knew me,” said natásha,
of soldiers with brick-red hands, necks, and faces, who were splashing
“but what nonsense i have been saying to the governor’s wife!” thought


letting yourself be tricked by an aide-de-camp of the emperor.
receiving from all sides declarations of the people’s loyalty, that

to sob aloud.
alien face of that man, his bayonet hanging down, holding his breath,
home. she waited on the old countess, petted and spoiled the children,
when natásha left the room pierre’s confusion and awkwardness


“what an extraordinary genius!” prince andrew suddenly exclaimed,
continually glanced at him. on growing used to the darkness pierre saw
but the first plunderers were followed by a second and a third
“what a clever man your father is,” said she; “perhaps that is why
not satisfied, let us have a bunt of our own. that’s all wight. je suis
helter-skelter from the wood opposite and the whole pack rushed across

“qu’on m’amène les boyars,” * said he to his suite.

he looked compassionately at balashëv, and as soon as the latter tried

had read, and listened to what was passing in the nursery. suddenly he
speaking to, and saw the quartermaster, topchéenko.
show, by disregarding the orders, that she did not believe in medical
word infected the whole crowd with a feeling of panic.
and new furniture sat berg and his wife. berg, closely buttoned up in


to rotate on one spot. the historical figures at the head of armies,
great redoubt held out well, by my pipe!” continued the frenchman. “and
aside, or it would have wiped you out!”

would not let him, and having closed the door behind him continued her
loud that those in the drawing room heard her and were startled. “why
he enlivened the whole party. the wax candles burned brightly, the

“sergéy kuzmích—from all sides—” he said, unbuttoning the top
“no, it can’t be helped, lad,” said the prince. “they’re
divisions, conquer—that is, kill or take captive—all the others, while
her fault that her face happened to assume an expression of calm dignity
abandoned the attempt to find the cause in the will of some one man,
affairs of his regiment and was considerate and kind to his men and
and convinced himself that the man was indeed a liberal, but of views
after calling her so in his presence did natásha notice it herself.
prince andrew liked dancing, and wishing to escape as quickly as
    chapter xxviii
hope. sónya and natásha were nursing him.
could he contemplate the burning of moscow, and when our armies did
to balashëv and informed him of the emperor napoleon’s wish to honor him
and pierre suddenly realized what a special, independent, complex, and
all she knew or not; she seemed to feel that before those luminous eyes
riding away, say to czartorýski: “what a terrible thing war is: what
unable to execute complicated maneuvers,” said he to milorádovich who

weyrother.

woke sónya and told her what she had done. the necessary antidotes had


though the most absent-minded and forgetful of men, pierre, with the aid

“yes, yes, thank god! well, and what news from the army?”
“oh, to die, to die for him,” thought rostóv.
infantry to the right of the battery came the sound of a drum and shouts
golítsyn and he has refused. be the kindhearted man you always were,”

missed him. his one desire was to know what was happening and at any

like a skin, and he spoke with a particularly refined compression of his
who had been moving slowly, shouted, “stop!” calling in the hounds,
“yes, i was brought up quite differently,” remarked the handsome
paused, looked ironically straight into balashëv’s eyes, and said in a
“i ought to tell you that i do not believe... do not believe in

their adjutants had come to witness the curious phenomenon of the
her companions’ not having the least conception that it could be
of borodinó. he had sought it in philanthropy, in freemasonry, in the

told his comrades how he had almost fallen into the hands of the french.

given receptions) now hardly let a day go by without having an evening
tíkhon, who at first did rough work, laying campfires, fetching water,

quite well known to everybody.
nose. arakchéev turned his head toward him without looking at him.
imperturbable calm she did not begin to speak in front of the valet.
evening passed, night came, and the feeling of suspense and softening of
pressing prince andrew’s hand and looking into his face with a
troops on this and that side in a certain known locality, and begin our
gazed at her. “o god! what will become of us if she dies, as i always
soldiers—ill-shod, insufficiently clad, and half starved—who within a
timókhin, armed only with a sword, had rushed at the enemy with such
and chief action of the battle of borodinó was already lost on the
had been revealed to him.
is, stormed and stormed and stormed! it was not a matter of life but
    chapter xii

“oh, hush, please!” said another.
sheet spread over the hay on the side nearest the door.
prince andrew, seeing that his father insisted, began—at first
and delight in, herself. “how charming that natásha is!” she said
knowing that denísov had a reputation even in poland for the masterly
mane—which, though he saw other faces as well, he had not lost sight
alpátych went out. the prince again went to his bureau, glanced into it,
smell of stable yards, delightful to pierre at that moment. he could see

on condition that she should tell no one.

pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at anna

that destroyed napoleon’s army, is impossible.
especially into the hands of that idiot anatole, pained borís. he drove
did say something about going.... speak to him; i can do nothing,

she felt any symptoms of pregnancy. she laughed contemptuously and said
uneasiness in her manner and was about to add something, but pierre
up and down his room, now turning his thoughts on a difficult problem
orders to admit no more, but the porter was told to be sure to invite to
shrieking were heard from different sides.

dinner.
as to who had taken whom prisoner, the frenchman ran back to the battery
natásha, and he was not surprised but quietly happy. natásha, motionless
that couch was dreadful to him, probably because of the oppressive
bare arms and neck were not beautiful—compared to hélène’s her
knew what she ought to have said to natásha, but she had been unable

him express his feelings, but still he has taken it better, far better,
evoked by the memory of the time when the paper he was now reading had

what is happening to us—but it is very strange and pleasant whatever
he honestly considered himself irreproachable, sincerely despised rogues
naked body and shuddered, not from cold but from a sense of disgust
round with much animation and cheerfully nodded to his son as the latter
“let me alone; it’s not true!” she cried angrily to him.
pranced up and down in one place like a goat and shrieked piercingly.
    chapter iv
“oh, yes, he has been waiting to start for some time.”
“there now, the kúrskies have also gone past,” was being said in
there he could see churches that had not been burned. the krémlin, which
her trunk had been taken down from its cart, and all the loads were

in the first case it was necessary to renounce the consciousness of an
for him to meet ladies at dinners and balls in petersburg.
“oh, it’s a fresh broadsheet.”
standing on the highest possible pinnacle of human power with the
propose.

except passionate love for her father, love such as she thought she had

saved your life, and i save your honor!” having repeated these words the
had petitioned the emperor to make him a german. the men of that party,
“and there’s nothing for you to say. i shall speak to him myself,”
they might be who were to blame for the false and ridiculous position in


innocent and untried?”

submitted to him by his marshals, and personally giving commands to his
achilles could never catch up with a tortoise he was following, in spite
it is for you to talk or think of such matters. it is no easier for
gesture with his trembling arms: “how dare you, sir, say that to me? you

waken...” all rose and cried “hurrah!” bagratión also rose and
gown tied round with a towel, and who evidently enjoyed the respect of

maids, had given orders to harness and intended to start, but when the
in her eyes, which, for an instant, glanced at pierre, prince vasíli
(of whom there were but few) moved about among the soldiers quite


formed in which float the diplomatists, who imagine that they have
     reflections on the unsatisfactory results of the battles at

the chantry long before, but that nine tenths of the peasants in that
sónya’s love and his promise to her. it was all dreadfully difficult
please impress upon leppich to be very careful where he descends for
worthy action to slay the evildoer, but now he felt that he would not
property, when one person advised one thing and another something else.
our sovereign alone has protested against the seizure of the duke
dólokhov’s reply.
mental image of his future activity in this direction rose in his mind.
may i shall do my duty. i will come and spend the night. he must not be
her nephew with her. whether it were difficult or easy, possible or
decided now or never. she lowered her eyes so as not to see the gaze
they rose from the table and sat down in the entrance porch which served
his feelings were like those of a conjuror who always expects his trick
did i come here?” he wondered.
dismounting he ordered a plan of moscow to be spread out before him, and

pointing to the flying soldiers; but at that instant, as if to punish
“yes.”
regiment, saying he was not such a fool as to slave at the front when he

the army was moving from west to east, and relays of six horses carried

by praise from this brilliant beauty that she blushed with pleasure.
galloping back. rostóv, picking out one on a gray horse, dashed after
and with a severe expression sailed back to her table in the sitting
that even if she did not understand, still she could not doubt, and at
“how’s this, colonel?” he shouted as he approached. “i told you
and her brother. for herself she did not care where she remained or what
“and who has told you what is bad for another man?” he asked.
or the gallows!”
peasants.
will be stationed along the highroads on tuesdays and saturdays at such
entered the room while he was picking up his tricks, glanced again at
smolyanínov, and it mortified him to think that the newcomer was an
“he has made wills enough!” quietly remarked the princess. “but he
sea of history remains calm the ruler-administrator in his frail bark,
words could do. you will perhaps also see in your further initiation a


“i was coming to tell you so.”
arm, led him aside.
pierre, swaying his stout body, advanced, making way through the crowd

or of the necessity of rebuilding factories and workshops. so the first

nonrecognition of something absolute, serving as the measure of visible
begged to be allowed to swim across the river before the emperor’s
promotions, and in this pursuit watched only the weathercock of imperial
the soldiers went out again, and the orderly, who had meanwhile had time
signed. the emperors exchanged decorations: alexander received the cross
mouth and flew out involuntarily he went on: “how was it, sir, that you
“we’re not willing. let them ruin us! we won’t take your grain. we don’t
she could not pray, could not weep, and worldly cares took possession of
attained.

they were going or why. if they regretted having to retreat, it was only
young wife she was irreproachable; perhaps she could not have been so
the act of falling asleep. rostóv lifted his head that had sunk almost
“bah, really? so much the better! you are certainly brave foes. the
was a unique chance to show his devotion to the emperor and he had not
already been concluded, he admitted to the emperor that the merit of
“we are such friends, such friends! all that ruler business was just
    chapter iv
is a dream,” said pierre. “understand, my dear fellow, that outside
their context. every word and action of his was the manifestation of
fellow you are for dancing!”
the cleverest among them, including the chief steward, understood from
pierre drove up to the house of the old prince in a most serious mood.
against a father’s will. one wants to do it peacefully and lovingly.
last dryly spoken words: “i will detain you no longer, general; you
that came from bad food, preferred to remain on duty, and hardly able
period, nor would there have been any contradictions.
understand only because i love. everything is, everything exists, only
russian army. they abandoned one another, abandoned all their heavy
front of the conflagration. in the middle of the street stood a french


the governor’s wife led him up to a tall and very stout old lady with
round-faced peasant gravely, pointing with a significant wink at the
part in the battle knew it.
immediately starting to run along the hall and up the warped steps of

me. i am used to suffering.”
containing lessons in geometry written by himself and drew up a chair
does she bother me?” and she added, turning to véra, “you’ll
middle of the drawing room on the first chair he had come across,
“to enter russia without declaring war! i will not make peace as long as
confusion and obscurity would result from such an account of the duel.
and laughter:
crying piteously and kissing me. one can do anything with him by
“if the animals in front are continually changing and the direction of
of all the combinations in which men unite for collective action one of
passions; but we must strive to direct them to a noble aim, and it is
crossed the dam prince andrew smelled the ooze and freshness of the
go through your performance.”
a very bad way of deciding whether a battle was won or lost. those who

became his enemies and their forces advanced against the fresh forces he
crimean bridge and some were already debouching into the kalúga road.
moment.”
the village letting the troops pass by him. that morning kutúzov seemed
wearing spectacles, sat in the drawing room in a loose dress, surrounded
sheaves of flame (now red and now like golden fish scales creeping along
states.

prince vasíli did not reply, though, with the quickness of memory and
a rage) and called for the company commander.
“sónya,” she suddenly exclaimed, as if she had guessed the true
“after that, i could not make out what there was; something blue and

“no, but don’t you think it’s nice?” she kept repeating.
the balk onto the ryefield, again put on speed still more viciously,
raised her tail and stiffened her forelegs.

“immediately, prince,” said kozlóvski. “dispositions for
clean shirts.”

germans, and everyone was convinced that a dangerous muddle had been
“thank you; you saved me, my dear fellow!” said túshin.
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all the
a tight place he runs away as quietly as he can, and often thinking to



natásha and princess mary also wept now, but not because of their own
prince vasíli a third time. “how absent-minded you are, my dear
“he is one of the most remarkable, but to me most unpleasant of
the passage. only malásha, andrew’s six-year-old granddaughter whom
with regard to religion, as to which in egypt matters had so easily been
“the soldiers say it feels easier without boots,” said captain
but had begun the attack next morning, no one would have doubted that

tiptoe to the countess’ door and paused.
ago.”

rarely speaks about the wife he has lost, the grief of that loss

prearranged sentence.
one another, and in her heart she sided with “granddad.” in the midst of
wont to dispose of all difficulties.


“well, have it so, and you talked a lot of nonsense to him and must
tormented by jealousy of her daughter, and now that jealousy concerned
knoll, and their guns boomed incessantly along their line and sent
government, thousands of enemy stragglers, marauders, and foragers had
this letter was brought to pierre’s house when he was on the field of

princess bolkónskaya, together with his silence and coldness of late,
where to haul it. they haul the log away, and it happens that this is
woman, but there, just fancy! those three got hold of a bear somewhere,
doctor and expecting another for whom they had sent to town, they had
night.
and bilíbin repeated the actual words of the diplomatic dispatch, which


themselves off and that all necessary preparations should be made to
words he had found so difficult to utter: “i love you.” “it all

reference to its effect on others, but simply in relation to himself, to
lovers!” he added.
sat waiting for something, and again soldiers straggling from their
“i was very much surprised when i heard of it,” said prince andrew.
it was a warm, dark, autumn night. it had been raining for four days.

front line, as if their differences would be settled there amongst the
sitting motionless before the glass, looking at her face, and saw in the
people dancing, iogel with natásha, his pride and his best pupil, were
have come to it,” said he.

“a fine lad! my word! a fine lad!... his father lies on his deathbed
arakchéev, uttering only the first words amiably and then—again
davout.
whole district, balashëv was brought to vílna—now occupied by the
“oh, how absurd you are! it is not beauty that endears, it’s love that

regarded it, had no meaning as a separate thing. it had meaning only as
passage to the stairs and, frowning and rubbing his forehead with
chapter xiv
“now listen to me. i’m telling you this for the last time. why
“and i!”—she turned away for an instant. “why too much?” she asked.
mademoiselle bourienne in her arms and gently stroking her hair. the
regarded by people as the acme of intelligence and refinement, and they
for him by a new light. he understood that latent heat (as they say in
pathetic, kindly old man much to be pitied.
and then back again, re-entering, he by the front and she by the back
“yes, i know,” said countess mary. “natásha told me.”
barclay). for god’s sake send me somewhere else if only in command of
“about my wife... i am ashamed as it is to leave her on your
one night prepared for a journey and started for moscow to see joseph
count rostopchín had only that morning returned to town from his summer
approaching enemy farther off. at the same instant the sun came fully

rostóv and ilyín gave rein to their horses for a last race along the
the generals seemed to listen reluctantly to the difficult dispositions.
frowning, looked at him from under his brows.
very fine when he said that,” he remarked, repeating the words in
nicholas, scratching mílka behind the ears.

for mademoiselle bourienne, and subsided into his study.
the terms of this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name
proclamation
frightened here?” and the artilleryman understood him.

therefore never be at peace. a stern expression of the lofty, secret
his voice said crossly:
rode down the street at a gallop. beside himself with enthusiasm,
chapter vi
of face, evidently worn out with childbearing—she had had twelve.

“that’s better, count,” said the staff captain, beginning to
necessities of life. the french did not need to be informed of the fact
alexander’s guards,” said the first one, indicating a russian
“i want to try to sing again,” she said, adding as if by way of excuse,
him. though nothing of the kind had happened to her she was regarded in
what am i to do?” thought she, recalling all the signs that clearly

duel prove? that you’re a fool, que vous êtes un sot, but everybody
him, or else how could that have happened which had happened? and how
    * “thank you for coming, my dear.”
would not have been much stimulated by it, for what had they to do with
to the fichu with a happy and kindly smile.
natásha looked in the direction in which her father’s eyes were
first epilogue: 1813 - 20
taught her to use would now be merely ridiculous in the eyes of
on the lips that wore a mustache and had a smell of burnt cork. sónya
there and sat dozing on the rolled-up bedding, evidently exhausted by
on the twenty-fourth of august the battle of the shevárdino redoubt was

one saw her. rostóv, holding his breath, looked round at the borzois.
foot. behind him a cavalry regiment was coming down the hill preceded by
of which her singing had been an unusually powerful part. she gave it up
were greater and more resourceful, nicholas felt himself cornered. this


horse, paced for a long time by the kámmer-kollézski rampart, awaiting

or to the place of execution his companions had pointed out to him as
but as things are now one can’t answer for anything.”
the little princess had also left the tea table and followed hélène.

wolf, who, increasing her speed, bounded on in the same direction along
reason and to prepare him for his terrible part. and when he is ready so
speaking of the position of prussia, anna pávlovna very naturally asked
to do it that it seemed to him as if it had really happened. perhaps
acting: there is war in russia! the enemy is advancing to destroy
division’s regiments, and battalions by heart.
observed the faces of those around him.
having a greater momentum, and with equal inevitability the ball
the pretext. when she wanted to be agitated, nicholas and his health
to know you,” said she to natásha with her stereotyped and lovely

one of disdain which was quite uncalled for. his fertile mind instantly

that if i once let myself see her i should not have strength to go on
he added, and looked up at pierre who was just approaching them.
pierre.
at that moment made itself felt.

hunger recalled him from these reflections; he had to get something to

rolled downwards.
getting out caldrons and rye biscuit, and feeding the horses. a third
saying.

army nothing but flogging, drilling, and military settlements; the
as he drove through the streets past the houses that had been burned
asked permission to be present at the battle out of curiosity. the
wheels and working the screws himself.
magnanimity of prince andrew who when he went abroad had given her her

imagined only important possibilities: “if the enemy attacks the right
packet wrapped in paper. he did it all silently and very quickly. he

glory, to father, son, and holy ghost, now and forever, world without


“you go to sleep, but i can’t,” said the first voice, coming

position of the shevárdino redoubt. that redoubt was quite senseless
sent you. religious! i don’t interfere with anyone’s belief... i
which it is difficult to justify.”
be heard. on the arbát square the troyka caught against a carriage;
fellow.”
nine days after the abandonment of moscow, a messenger from kutúzov
     him for not keeping his word to me.”
and swallowed the cold snow, his lips quivered but his eyes, still
and her face was tearful.
were passing that morning, then into the distance across the river, then
that it is the lieutenant colonel himself,” said the esaul, who was fond
hands....”
to discipline who on duty at the word of command kills a defenseless


after the deaths of her son and husband in such rapid succession, she
front of her looking with pleasure at the town, she bowed her head
inevitability governing the actions of these people is clearly defined

because his line was not straight, he reached the third company.

to tell you. there is a war now against napoleon. if it were a war for
officer named ilyín, his protégé, was sitting in a hastily constructed
arrived.
him money under the guise of loans.
apparition of a girl in a white chemise, dressing jacket, and nightcap.
“mamma! what sweets are we going to have?” natásha again cried
“yes, we are soldiers of the ápsheron regiment. i was dying of fever. we
promise and could not bring herself to decide to do what was demanded

life, he felt an unaccountable tenderness for this young man and made up
of a contemporary, the consequences of which are still unknown to me.
chapter vi
calf served up with sauce. they talk to us of the rules of war, of
listening to an approaching whistle in the hidden region of smoke. “one,
they crossed the virgin’s field.

how do you judge of it?” he added, addressing nicholas, who when he


admitted that he had been to blame, did not lift his eyes from the
the same evening that the prince gave his instructions to alpátych,

past. anatole was sitting upright in the classic pose of military
exasperated whisper, evidently meaning to wound his sister.
quiet authority, “you wish to insult me, and i am ready to agree with
a dark noncommissioned officer who was always shaggy, stood up to his
denísov sat gloomily biting his mustache and listening to the

brought his snuffbox to rest and, without looking at weyrother or at
he lifted himself and sat up. a frenchman who had just pushed a russian

and drew out his pocketbook.
rebuking her for her fall.
to live for myself avoiding those two evils is my whole philosophy
maximum. kutúzov saw this and merely sighed and shrugged his shoulders.

before. “one only wonders at the long-suffering or blindness of the
“why, i didn’t recognize you!” he said. but rostóv was otherwise
responsibility and vice versa.
“but what could have happened? what did i want? i want his death!” she


the kitchen garden looked wet and black and glistened like poppy seed
tomorrow’s battle would be the most terrible of all he had taken
for not strictly obeying the doctor’s orders?
still kept awake at night so as not to miss the proper time when the
“impudent fellows!” said the prince. “you know métivier? i turned

he embraced his daughter, and then again pierre, and kissed him with his

calamity! what a calamity!”
what he had acquired. like a monkey which puts its paw into the narrow
but without finishing what she was saying, princess mary burst into

no more. she is so affected. ask her in,” she said to the footman in a
flung it on the ground.
talk in general centered round three melancholy facts: the emperor’s
the russians aimed at.

stomach with an already stiffened arm flung wide.
inform him of the facts, in her son’s presence, but unable to restrain
enemy’s lines of communication between smolénsk and vyázma. denísov came
gaily, with a wide swing of his arm.
“oh, it is really too late,” said count orlóv, looking at the camp.
country, but through the village. at one spot he stopped and listened.
only thoughts. something was lacking in them, they were not clear, they
would be easier to see people coming along it. “follow me!” said he,

offensive, the plan of which, carefully prepared in accord with the
“i would go with you but on my honor i’m up to here”—and he pointed to
with enjoyment, gazing with ever-increasing amiability at the other
strained frown she peered toward the world where he was. and now, now
away.
man, be for her? in her thoughts of marriage princess mary dreamed of

lorrain considered.
bagratión’s troops, which had not yet advanced into action but were

and inhuman role predestined for him.
honest, practical man and we have nobody better. give him real power,

authorities, projects, counsels, threats, and deceptions and is
his confusion, instantly continued in the same pleasant tones:
balashëv bowed his head affirmatively.

hot. pierre, however, felt excited, and the general desire to show that


and terénty would begin talking of the destruction of moscow, and of
in the world and above everything in the world. “what were losses, and
“there, leave bruin alone; here’s a bet on.”
his idea that le principe des monarchies est l’honneur me paraît
a lump of snow cannot be melted instantaneously. there is a certain
round sónya and natásha as the air does before a thunderstorm. sónya

you, my friend, are missing...” and so on.

freemason,” she went on, indicating pierre. “put him beside his wife
they demanded contributions of fuel.


the swift sinister whistle of a cannon ball, now with the agreeable
a man of education, who speaks french. he is a russian seigneur who has
forms of pleasure—balls, promenades, concerts, and theaters—but she
rostóv, his eyes avoiding denísov, began buttoning his coat, buckled
soldiers of his army whether they had taken part in the battle or not,
andrew. i do not think he would choose her for a wife, and frankly i do
submissive general.


soldiers, and militiamen began running forward along the road.

nicholas’ letter in which he mentioned princess mary had elicited, in

that had previously occurred to him of the cabalistic significance of
large divisions with staffs also knew of this convoy and, as denísov
the look she felt upon her made that world still more poetic. but
going too. besides, all the same i can’t study now when...” pétya
quite covered by an apron. on the box beside the driver sat a venerable
count tolstóy, who had ridden out to the battlefield with others in
pardon. as soon as rostóv heard them, an enormous load of doubt

“what a beauty—a very queen!” said the nurse as she came to the
not stiffen while open, and with another handkerchief tied together the
“and so you think napoleon will manage to get an army across?” asked
covered her with two quilts, and herself brought her some lime-flower
and at the beginning of august showed that they expected this. those who
the crowd drew up to the large table, at which sat gray-haired or bald
but if you want to ride round the position, come along with us. we are
“three,” he went quickly forward, missing the trodden path and
stretcher into which his head had sunk deep and again his eyelids
respect, he had decided that it would be a good thing to set fire to the
moscow. as a result he could not go to the country with the rest of the

fact of a great man executing a duc—or even an ordinary man who—is
alpátych, conferred with dessalles about her nephew, and gave orders and
after they had received a letter from nicholas telling of his meeting

“one thing has come on top of another: her rags to buy, and now a
“well, prince, may god give you great luck!” said matrëna in her gypsy
opinion.
a gully that lay in her path. she was an old animal with a gray back and


captivity was gradually led on to do so.
sónya’s letter written from tróitsa, which had come as an answer to
shishkóv, the secretary of state and one of the chief representatives of
plátov’s division was acting independently of the main army. several
“don’t put it in so carelessly,” said one of the peasants, a man with a
he remembered the words the emperor alexander had not written in his
ought not to refuse a supplicant, and ought to reach a helping hand to
it was the attack in which he was said to have thrown some st. george’s
the sun bathed the top of the opposite slope with yet another sort of

master. the masters, both the old prince and the young, and the steward
with a merry, smiling face pierre was sorting his purchases.
resolve when he had last visited bald hills, though he had spoken of it
and most just of monarchs. soldiers and citizens, of whatever nation you

confidence,” said she, repeating the mistake of so many parents who
well for you,” said natásha, with a responsive smile. “you should
lofty, beautiful feeling, such a...”
question a russian prisoner captured by the cavalry. followed by
“puff! puff!”—and two clouds arose pushing one another and blending

beautiful eyes grew dim, red blotches came on her face, and it took

and looked at her in such a way that not only could she not bear his
“would you like a little mash?” the first soldier asked, and handed
him, in accord with the will of hundreds of thousands of people who took
sometimes they were silent for hours; sometimes after they were already
    chapter vii
least have some for my sake! she must be shown that the blockhead thinks
for the princess’ things. and don’t go to any meeting yourself, do you
sheet. good-by, my dear friend. may god keep you in his holy and mighty
“we were ordered to be at the place before nine, but we haven’t got
pierre came up to him and caught him by the arm.
an escort, on the pretext of inspecting the army and the scene of the

deliberately.
borís. “he wanted to thank you himself.”

as long as this news remained unofficial it was possible to doubt it,
suddenly heard a sound new to him, of something swiftly approaching...

magnítski immediately assumed a pose and began reciting some humorous
her. and not the face she had known ever since she could remember and
    chapter vi
pierre went to princess mary’s to dinner.
idea. she consulted a russian priest as to the possibility of divorce
that kutúzov’s upper lip twitched unnaturally as he said the
bezúkhov’s household, despite all the search they made, saw pierre again
with its legs in the air, sat a peasant woman uttering piercing and
jumped out quickly. the count got out helped by the footmen, and,



pelagéya, turning to princess mary for support.
what a voice she has; though she’s my daughter, i tell the truth
berg smiled with a sense of his superiority over a weak woman, and
sat down at her writing table, on which stood miniature portraits and
recalled my conversations with him, and deduced from it all that i
among the men and a dispute about something important and clever. now
of men, kutúzov—having taken into consideration the cossack’s report, a
went about the rooms fashionably dressed but looking sad and dull. here,

i had the power,” he began again, “i would not take prisoners. why take
he had ever tasted. as he sat bending greedily over it, helping himself
so doing we should destroy the very conception of man in the case we are
calling and there’s nobody there; go and gather the clothes together.”
she drew nearer to him. her face flushed.

there is any misunderstanding and discord between you and mary, i can’t

himself up like a black pillar at sight of the emperor, napoleon stopped
again are all running back somewhere, and i shall run with them, and it,
said at tilsit.”
in another form but along the same path of reflection the other sciences
free agricultural laborers—this being one of the first examples of
the old man, and showed pierre a globe. this globe was alive—a vibrating
fires were lighted and the talk became more audible. captain túshin,
the hut. the panes were rattling in the little windows and his groom was
her.” and he vividly pictured to himself natásha, not as he had done in
she used to have quarrels with the too indulgent count, that son who
“there’s someone coming,” said he.
matter plainly and simply, and we will not abandon that right.
of doubt showed itself on his face as he spoke.
austrian council of war at which suvórov crowed like a cock in reply to
and rapidly opening the door he went resolutely out onto the balcony.
“is that mary practicing? let’s go quietly and take her by

“yes, and even tomorrow,” replied her brother.
“but it’s all the same now,” pierre could not help saying.
those he termed they), and he heard those people, anatole and dólokhov,


my advice,” she began. “yesterday, as you know, i went to see prince
everything was becoming more and more happy and animated. “oh, how i
myself, “am i telling the truth?” and suddenly i saw him lying like
began speaking in a voice that faltered and trembled with emotion. this
no right to reproach her even in her heart.
with his forty-year-old stomach understood that hint, not feeling his
europe, led them to the goal.

the phrase “project gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work,
while the emperor was dining, valúev, looking out of the window, said:
the old interests of her carefree girlish life that had been so full
everything: a carriage passing rapidly in the street, a summons to

the greater part of the men had to halt and an unpleasant consciousness
“well, my dear fellow, tomorrow we are off at last,” said prince
admiration at the very oak he sought. the old oak, quite transfigured,
nothing except the people about him.

princess told the count that she would be delighted, and only begged him
now both her daughters were settled, her only wish was to see him

“but no, they will take it their own way, they won’t understand! they
repulsed, he had lost more than half his men. he said the attack

on returning late in the evening sónya went to natásha’s room, and
guilty of anything, he added, taking pierre’s hand in a friendly manner,

cotillion, having completed one of the figures, natásha, still out of
have been a merchant’s son. what men!... and they say he’s not the right
after tea, the company went into the sitting room and princess mary was
or not rubbed fine enough. after these fits of irritability her face
conflicts of various wills!

trouble, but the mason told him that was not necessary and gave him

had been put in position?”
imploringly at her, evidently afraid that she might not understand.
“oh, my bower, oh, my bower...!”
seemed to princess mary.
“of course! it’s marvelous. so bold, so easy!”

“well, now you’ve done what you wanted,” put in nicholas—“said
coming out upon a broad trodden track across a meadow, near a river.
proverb says,” remarked shinshín, moving his pipe to the other side
and so it might be supposed that all necessary arrangements would be
the opera he described to dólokhov with the air of a connoisseur the

is the baby born?”
mary, of the theater, and of kurágin mingled with her thoughts. the
all! but probably he knows it well enough and is only pretending. shall

denísov, who had come out of the study into the dancing room with his
karatáev looked at pierre with his kindly round eyes now filled with

was a distant relative of the rostóvs’, a man of small means, and
which she imagined must be the same toward everyone as it was to her.
rostóv became thoughtful.
listened to their talk with a serious and thoughtful air, and then got
    * “i love you.”
when she took her seat opposite and beamed upon him also with her
paulucci, as the emperor mounted the steps and noticing prince andrew
have no end.
by the fact that kutúzov evidently could not or would not understand the
russian army will be fully equipped, and shall then, in conjunction with
disastrous was about to happen.

and did not once mount a horse to inspect his entrenchments.... we shall
rostóv had been ordered to look for kutúzov and the emperor near the
understood that she was being asked to entertain this young man, and
but a few days before they left moscow, moved and excited by all that
the sergeant ran up to the officer and in a frightened whisper informed
after the roast, champagne was served. the guests rose to congratulate
question. all the contradictions and obscurities of history and the
“a mo-o-st me-r-r-y co-o-m-pa...!” sang one of the peasants with a

were something new. “i understand the deception and confusion,” he
“no, don’t... the island of madagascar!” she said, and jumping off
at last the emperor stopped beside his last partner (he had danced
fortune. suddenly he heard a familiar voice repeating something to him a
“what is he talking about?” thought prince andrew. “oh, the
“the french,” replied ilyín jestingly, “and here is napoleon
loving her; in deceiving yourself and her.” and he vividly recalled
about midnight they heard the sound of steps in the snow of the forest,

old fool who, without any reason, keeps his own daughter at a distance
began to speak eagerly, occasionally lapsing into french or expressing



all the pages there were excellent drawings. and in my dream i knew
otherwise in his absence.
the applicable state law. the invalidity or unenforceability of any
side of the activity of a leader expresses the nation’s life, we have
my business. i owe you my life. that is enough for me. i am quite at
with drooping head princess mary left the crowd and went back to the
there was not a trace of agitation on his face. with delicate irony he
chapter xviii
the general confusion. the men of this party had both the quality
fresh as ever!”
the cannon the men moved still more briskly and busily. no one any
chapter xix
borodinó.
chapter xviii
that it is more dangerous to run away than to advance, but that russian
the parquet to the door opening into the garden, where, seeing balashëv
darted forward at every word or gesture of the commander in chief,
rode side by side in front, at full gallop. one in a black uniform with

antipathies,” thought prince andrew, “so it will not do to present
had last met on the old prince’s name day, she had answered at random
from the commander of the militia he drove to the governor. the governor
“no, it’s the chorus from the water-carrier, listen!” and natásha
projects for peace, a secret peace concluded separately.”
‘but what i am most sorry for is this old man. don’t let him suffer
been telling us such a tale about mademoiselle george and buonaparte!”
the changed expression on prince bagratión’s face at this moment. it
everyone!

wounded, and davout killed; yet at the very time the adjutant had been


side and very becoming to his handsome face. having looked in a mirror,
toward evening he ceased moaning and became quite still. he did not know
“that’s admirable!” he shouted. “he will take you with your


supplies were for the most part stored along the oká in the túla and

whispered to one another, casting significant looks at him with a kind
his fingers into his belt and smiling a little, walked to the front.
the recognition of man’s free will as something capable of influencing
arisen in all ranks—the force of circumstances compelled it to retire

princess mary was left alone. she did not comply with lise’s request,
or another peasant would have to explain to him that it is not the devil

pierre drank one glass after another, looking from under his brows at
it left. yes, i told you—the whole quarter beyond the river, and so it
history as the recognition of a free force moving the heavenly bodies
next glanced round in alarm.

they were all waiting for bennigsen, who on the pretext of inspecting
night long without closing their eyes, while the adjutants and
profligacy. illuminism is not a pure doctrine, just because it is
the weight of his knapsack.
russians and salutary for the french. if the position of the russian
confess and ask for money he had no right to after giving his word of
“yes, mamma, i tell you sincerely that these are hard and sad times for

a different thing. i know no one kinder, more generous, or better than

petersburg. but now this head was swaying helplessly with the uneven
chivalry, of flags of truce, of mercy to the unfortunate and so on. it’s
takes place at such moments.
“i desire peace, no less than the emperor alexander,” he began. “have
as usual. it was a hot july day. even at ten o’clock, when the rostóvs
willarski bowed his head.

of her children, and sharing every moment of her husband’s life, she had
“what is a ‘ticket’?” nicholas inquired.
and shot him in the fleshy part of the back. that wound (which tíkhon
with life, but the malady that had formerly found expression in such
moscow without a battle,” though moscow was then already abandoned. when
he took the pistol in his hand and began asking about the working of the
for more than a week preparations were being made, rough drafts of
in actions that follows from the consciousness of freedom? that is a

“yes, so it is, so it is,” said the general angrily, lowering the

himself, but only desires the good of mankind. and what have they

the elderly lady was a princess drubetskáya, belonging to one of the
squeezed together, sat women with rouged faces, dressed in glaring
behind, though more than a hundred perished in that way. he did not
had remained uninjured and needed only slight repairs. life did not
princess mary went back to her room with the sad, scared expression that
regular tread and halted eight paces from the post. pierre turned away
regimental commander and major ekonómov had stopped beside a bridge,
he had been beside the gun, he had heard the voices of the officers

added. countess hélène bezúkhova had suddenly died of that terrible



which unites the deepest bass with the shrillest tenor, and round
the reading of novels, the distribution of awards, his correspondence
“the praise of a great commander is a soldier’s highest reward,”
first-rate comrade and officer—in a word, a splendid man altogether, a
never had been sharpened.) “can you do it?”
commands dependent one on another. napoleon could not have commanded
point of view and study the laws of the movement of steam, of the

apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed
“that will teach them to start fires,” said one of the frenchmen.
his knee.

as usual. despite their pale swollen faces and tattered uniforms, the
leave you cold a thousand times and the thousand and first time thrill
and now, to get rid of them, handed over to them a man to be killed
nothing from life but tranquillity, and that tranquillity only death
then coming into vogue. he laughed at theoretical treatises on estate
the first of you who moves forward.” little nicholas turned to look
destruction of the prussian army at jena and auerstädt and the
dinner and the potatoes are grand!”


“no, i went to look at the fire, and they arrested me there, and tried

“nicholas! come out in your dressing gown!” said natásha’s voice.
at that moment nicholas noticed the presence of his nephew. his face
prince, she prepared to listen.
for aid to god and his saint.
marshals. his eye fell on pierre’s large and striking figure, and in
the countess had been prepared by anna mikháylovna’s hints at dinner.


expeditions to olmütz to visit a certain caroline the hungarian,
is denísov!”
spot. disregarding the officers’ orders, the soldiers stood leaning
the action the less they can command and the more numerous they are,
at all as it really was. rostóv was a truthful young man and would on
were called for and received from the footman by bare girlish arms from
the last rôle is played. the actor is bidden to disrobe and wash off his


seize her from behind by her bare arm and kiss her on the neck. they
gerásim, being a servant who in his time had seen many strange things,
after the austerlitz campaign prince andrew had firmly resolved not
of the carriage.
established himself with count bennigsen, who, like all on whom borís
“i think, however, that these condemnations have some ground,”
import of what was taking place lay in the personal struggle between

of the uniform or from some other cause pierre saw before him quite a
“hurrah!” and resolved that tomorrow, come what might, he would join the
everything from the table napkins to the silver, china, and glass bore
chubby little dokhtúrov was listening attentively with eyebrows
fight bonaparte by this new science you call ‘strategy.’”

temporarily—he felt that it no longer existed for him and could not
good old days. denísov, flushed after the mazurka and mopping himself
thirtieth he attacked mortier’s division, which was on the left bank,
definite idea of her, he turned away and addressed michael ivánovich.
a while, she suddenly hears someone coming... a sleigh drives up with



you’re not angry with me! tell me everything—the whole truth. what
the search for these laws has long been begun and the new methods of
“o lord! oh, it will be the death of me! o lord!” moaned the man in a



“i think i may congratulate you,” whispered anna pávlovna to the
she has connections and some means. in our times that is worth

his in the diplomatic service.
drank a great deal. he was only quite at ease when having poured several
alone with her, so rostóv, now that he had attained what he had longed
officer reported that no order to advance had been received.

entrusted to him, addressed pierre sternly.
no knowledge of them. this city was evidently living with the full force



got out of their carriage at the chapel, the sultry air, the shouts of
occurred before our fathers’ eyes, and for them it was a question of the

    chapter xiii
words. touched that this statuesque princess could so change, pierre
     project gutenberg literary archive foundation.  royalty payments
pierre was one of those people who, in spite of an appearance of what
with trembling hands, threw his body across the saddle, righted himself,
agitation. but the more he tried to hide it the more clearly—clearer

this union all is filled with deceit and falsehood and i agree with you
quarreled about—i don’t even remember!”
noticed embarrassment and awkwardness on his part in her presence,

“what stupid orders! they don’t themselves know what they are
a scoundrel, but our ladies crawl after him on their knees. i went to
consciousness that something great and mysterious was being accomplished
done, the rhetor said:
in hospital.
“you know n— n— received a snuffbox with the portrait last
beaucoup d’estime, and again her face clouded over with sadness.
“oh yes,” she answered. “you noticed nothing?” her look asked.

i have received what was due from the ryazán estate and will keep it;
without him—he knew he must go away from this good, bright world to

beautiful young princess who was sitting some way off, the center of
peace.” but however much they left her in peace she could not now be

trivial but even amusing. what concern was it of his that somewhere or
will be. i am in attendance on him, you know; i’ll mention it to him.
“yes, yes!” cried natásha opening her eyes wide, and vaguely recalling

“with young count peter, by the zhárov rank grass,” answered simon,
inclination—practical business.
but strange to say, all these measures, efforts, and plans—which were
“i should like to speak well of them, but as far as i know the facts,

and having picked up one of the wealthiest heiresses in russia, he grew
slightly open, as if to say, “yes, yes, i am putting my purse in my
the sitting room.
“it doesn’t matter to me. i only wish it for your sake.”
“hand it in. it seems...”

i was right. without boasting, you know, i may say that i know the army
purified, thou wilt gain wisdom. look at your life, my dear sir.
“he is my uncle, your sewene highness.”
expression for the unknown remainder of what we know about the laws of
speak and to attract their attention, he got up, but at that moment his
porch took out a clean pocket handkerchief and tied a knot in it.
affectionate as it was—expressed a sense of his own superiority.
with anything in regard to her; and that always will be so in whatever
she heard the sound of quick footsteps in the quiet street. someone
mined?”
a shrewd, kindly, yet subtly derisive expression lit up kutúzov’s podgy
conviction that all would be well, but that one must not trust to this
the desire for revenge that lay in the heart of every russian as long as
davout raised his head, pushed his spectacles back on his forehead,
andrew, whom borís was expecting, entered the room. prince andrew, who
concerned with, or he wanted to give the russian special messenger that
awake. he heard female voices overhead.

rejects all knowledge that does not come from him; and the less we seek

impossible not to see that there could be no such direct cause of the

in his mind an unsettled question he always tried to stifle, one about
he disarmed his hearers.
“hurrah-ah-ah!” reverberated in the forest, and the cossack companies,
never felt till that moment. she ran out sobbing into the garden and as
from a dream and lifted his head.

he gave me a notebook, the one i am now writing in and in which i will
the russian soldiers with red and vacant eyes. occasionally he emitted

father’s affairs in order, and would even—he felt it—ensure princess
of assurance and haste, pierre concluded that it was all absolutely
difference in their ages, but she felt herself to blame toward him and
the old man was already sitting barefoot. the little frenchman had
voice were at once heard from there.
there never was or could have been such an aim, for it would have been
its small circlet saw smoke and men, sometimes his own and sometimes
queen, but the king waved his arm severely, and men and women with bare
princess mary with a gentle smile looked now at pierre and now at
alpátych collected his parcels, handed them to the coachman who had come
of the crowd pétya had seen in the square, there was a striking
he went over his vices in his mind, not knowing to which of them to give
stranger. this was the marshal of the nobility of the district, who
himself as the possessor of those pénza and nizhegórod estates and

included scarcely a hundred and forty thousand who spoke french. the
unfortunate, a stranger, alone, helpless! and, oh god, how passionately
“drubetskóy has proposed?”

and had more than once impressed on his daughter that michael ivánovich
thought about sónya. he had pictured each of those young ladies as
often than at anyone else and took delight in his every movement.
of imitation gold can be used only among a group of people who agree to

a stout major was pacing up and down the line, and regardless of the
certainly have been lost; but not only did she show no signs of secrecy
to walk up and down before it.
in the empty house of his deceased benefactor, bazdéev. this is how it
“they are talking about us, about me and him!” thought natásha.

military men, bore that expression of condescending respect for their

scanning the brilliant tiers of boxes opposite. a sensation she had not
frenchmen, with the politeness characteristic of his countrymen,

princess mary rose and moved to the door, then stopped and said:
the honor, but i shall never be your son’s wife.”
return to petersburg from abroad.

again, as soon as all turned toward him, excused himself and said no
and a few days later left to rejoin his regiment.
dólokhov stood at the gate of the ruined house, letting a crowd
into french which suited it better.
        “it’s a long, long way.
therefore—this is between ourselves—i instinctively feel that we
stepping into the deep snow. he held the pistol in his right hand at
of life. and that other side of life, of which she had never before
senseless and unattainable.
efforts with which he moved his tongue made her drop her eyes and with
aroused in him no feeling but pity that she had not known the bliss he
kutúzov walked through the ranks, sometimes stopping to say a few
and insignificance—particularly acute by contrast with the sphere of
quarters were, he believed, not far off.
seem very bad, and every learned militarist criticizes them with looks
his undertaking, going over its minutest details in his mind. in his
he finished and, getting up, embraced and kissed pierre, who, with tears
“the past always seems good,” said he, “but did not suvórov
a story, heard from her aunt but finished in her own way, which she


without taking any notice of him although they were now meeting for the
“you heard probably of the heroic exploit of raévski, embracing his two
it turns out that ‘the enemy of the human race’ pays no heed to
gathered round nicholas in the sitting room.
daughter’s and move away.
“and here, friend, the people are quite beggarly. there they all
philosophic—we find a general law of necessity to which he (like all
cause, kind and noble beings able to find happiness in life—not merely

carriage, her husband was adjusting his saber; prince hippolyte, under
to say, all that could be got out of them.



self-reproach, and hopes reawoke.
natásha remained alone and, from the time princess mary began making
ill and could not walk, the officer replied that the order was to shoot




your business! it won’t be you, but i, who’ll suffer. leave me
to the left, and among the orange-colored uhlans on chestnut horses and
seat.
the rhetor but pierre’s sponsor, willarski, whom he recognized by his

morning greeting, crossing herself with trepidation and repeating a
by a scarlet-liveried footman that morning, ran as follows:
learned still another new, consolatory truth—that nothing in this world
chapter x
sect or party, or an inventor, impresses us less when we know how or by
pierre was evident. she kept an anxious watch on him when he approached
the factory hands followed him. these men, who under the leadership of

to ryazán he found the country dull; his former pursuits no longer
were in a hurry to show the changes that had taken place in them.
catacombs came to him and said, ‘believe in me and i will make you
fóka, the butler, was the most ill-tempered person in the house.
affair of the thabor bridge, at vienna.... they have crossed without
of right and wrong. for the “great” man nothing is wrong, there is no
“i was told it would be dangerous because of the enemy. dear friend, i
often heard. “what is this?” thought prince andrew approaching the
screen before the choir on the left side, and a feeling, new to her, of
together as they approached it as if passing through a funnel. at last
his youngest boy, had all settled down in the drawing room and were
about whom they both knew, had moved with her cubs to the otrádnoe
there are children, turned to prince andrew’s little son, caressing him
entanglements of life, he was living so calmly and quietly. he felt that

borís knew nothing about the boulogne expedition; he did not read the
“what were you thinking about just now, nicholas?” inquired
tears.”

to give her friend the pleasure of dandling the little angel—as she
said natásha. “mamma, if you’ll let me, i’ll stay!”
pressed it that terrible evening four days before his death. and in her
rostóv and the assistant went into the dark corridor. the smell was so

“we won’t speak of it, my dear—i’ll tell him everything; but one thing
and particularly amiable smile.
“vereshchágin! hasn’t he been hanged yet?” shouted rostopchín. “bring
greatcoats, and some with horsecloths over their heads. the horses,
have been agreeable—she did not know—but she had no time at all for it.
that does not exist, and to recognize a dependence of which we are not
“your excellency!” he said. “why, we were beginning to despair! how is
seemed to me to have an excellent heart, and that is the quality i value
without undressing, he generally remained awake thinking.
the fulfillment of duty, he rose to see some visitors off and, stroking
with his thin legs, went up to kutúzov.
at dinner, conversation turned on pierre’s marriage.
hurrah!” pétya stood on tiptoe and pushed and pinched, but could see
“mamma, one need not be ashamed of his being a widower?”

study, on the blue sofa, the confidential sofa? why cannot i now, as

poisoned the artificial tranquillity which he managed to obtain in

once she came to her mother, tried to say something, and suddenly began
smolénsk and thought only of how to advance farther, though as we now
spent, and almost every year he was obliged to borrow. besides this the
official in felt boots and wearing a commissariat uniform ran round from
became flustered and heated, raised her voice, and sometimes pulled him

that had been brought that day.
pierre’s gloomy, unhappy look struck her. she stopped in front of him.
shoulders and eyes, almost closing the latter, sighed, and moved away
historians give, from the compilers of memoirs and the histories
reached moscow and there came to a standstill. for five weeks after that
commander in chief.
historic character is first the product of his time, and his power only
god,” said pierre, regretfully and with an effort, feeling it
gun carriage. a cossack who accompanied him had handed him a knapsack
have given the emperor alexander moldavia and wallachia, and now he
conditions exists—the facts of history almost always contradict that
her.”
not smile with pleasure or affection for his son, but with quiet, gentle
of battles, dashing about in front of regiments, showering crosses on
shouted denísov, suddenly, turning purple and rushing at the man with
not ready. he did not wish to deprive them of the pleasure of giving him


involuntarily yielded to nicholas’ good humor. toward the end of the
conceal the facts of the case, insisted that he had gained his victory
town,” said pierre, “and that the position...”

and understood the meaning of the rebuke and despair in that protracted
after her life in the country, and in her present serious mood, all this
would excuse her want of ceremony and come upstairs to her apartment.
“no really, my dear, this dress is not pretty,” said lise, looking

damned fool!” cried denísov, not pronouncing his r’s. “such ill
me. ‘everyone fears a bear,’ he says, ‘but when you see one your
vílna; or remain in moscow; in short, no special genius would seem to be


that column himself. when he had reached the village of pratzen he
other guests were gervais, magnítski, and stolýpin. while still in
one of them he dwelt long and joyfully. he vividly recalled an evening
active and clearer than ever, but they acted apart from his will. most
he changed his sergeant major and was unable to manage all the drunken
sofa, her head hidden in her hands, and she did not stir. she was in
“you must look for husbands for them whether you like it or not....”
into a careless, merry smile. “what am i? an illegitimate son!”
should or should not do, but the standard was quite firm and definite in
did not, for instance, say to himself: “this man now has influence, i
on reading that letter (she always read her husband’s letters) natásha

glittering teeth and sparkling eyes. she told of an accident they had
the valley. the fourth column, with which kutúzov was, stood on the

eat?... perhaps...”
with bright, attentive, and animated eyes, as if trying to understand
“it must be from their food,” said the sergeant major. “they used to
stating them to the emperor francis. he vividly imagined the casual

millions of money are paid him.
bit of boastful patriotism slipped out at the end.

and he began to sob, and again tears flowed from his eyes. princess mary
deeds, and while dying he expressed the love his actions had proved.
“you may go. i don’t need you to tell me what to do!” exclaimed
something i have received from the chancellor. i asked him for you, and
liberty. he was alone in a strange town, without acquaintances. no one
nurse is unnatural and harmful. when her next baby was born, despite

“as one community, without distinction of class, without enmity, united
on the position of affairs. everything precious and valuable had been
one shot struck a french soldier’s foot, and from behind the screens

a series of experiments and arguments proves to every man that he, as
morel will warm us up another little bottle. morel!” he called out
“do you remember me?” asked borís quietly with a pleasant smile.


hundred thousand rubles’ worth of goods. can they be saved when the army
what a plight our anatole...”
gathering of speránski’s intimate acquaintances already assembled
thought of everything, considered everything, and did everything the

in our lack of understanding we see only our weakness and his

face as if driving off a troublesome fly. “and why are you stopping
artillerymen, some of whom were fighting, while others, having abandoned
“when are you starting?” he asked.
money prepared for use in russia should be delivered as quickly as

from the room with a moan either of pain or sorrow.
its inhabitants have left it and it is occupied by soldiers who smoke
evidently weakened, was undertaking nothing.
him. the sword cut on his arm could scarcely be called a wound. he
of them, and they were thrown over the parapet and removed later on that
beginning of the nineteenth century lies in the movement of the mass of
aid of his servant, and not looking at pierre. with a pair of felt boots


having changed horses twice and galloped twenty miles in an hour and a


“go on! what the devil... go on! thirty thousand devils!...” the convoy
them in his study before having a nap.
after her father’s funeral princess mary shut herself up in her room and

understand.... bezúkhov, now, is blue, dark-blue and red, and he is

inheritance together with the obligation to pay the debts.
in enemy hands while the sick russians left behind were among their
“good morning, good morning! but don’t go overriding the hounds,”
who had wished to stop the affair ran to a corner of the room and threw




whether they want rain or fine weather: “the wind has blown the clouds
sónya could not continue, and again hid her face in her hands and in
was on this that the cossacks all busied themselves.

in conversation—count rostopchín, prince yúri dolgorúkov, valúev,
out to look for the child, so crowded was it now with people and goods

one considers that by tomorrow one may be dead, or something so
beauty as she glided away. “and how she carries herself! for so young

a distorted corpse. he muttered unceasingly, his eyebrows and lips
be crossed and you will have to find out what is there, just as you will


was repeatedly summoned to see him. at headquarters and among the troops
events occur solely by the will of a napoleon, and alexander, or in
monsieur pierre?” he concluded.
so he simply held out his bristly cheek (as yet unshaven) and, regarding
“ah, i know what it is.”


the natural sciences: leaving aside the question of cause, they seek for
drove away with their swords the crowd of prisoners who were gazing at


thought, glancing at the lady in the black dress.
agree,” or for variety, “i too am of that opinion,” and so on had even a
“it’s the enemy?... no!... yes, see it is!... for certain.... but
to disperse among the wealthy and deserted houses, the army was lost
and he was quietly telling me something about the teaching of our order,
vain. she did not at all realize that before having seen her future
head with its bold features and glittering eyes was resting on his hand.
affectionate letters to your parents, and if you think you may be
gutenberg-tm license.
is incorrect and that the real course of the battle is better known to
prince andrew’s life. though outwardly he continued to live in the

“if he is accused of circulating napoleon’s proclamation it is not
with sónya and borís, and véra with a subtle smile was saying
he was in contact with the springs that set in motion the enormous

two dragoons took it by its distorted legs and dragged it along the
with difficulty.

ermólov’s quarters.
which was pitched that day on the steep left bank of the niemen, and
in petersburg and that a copy, which he had himself seen, had that day

own parish, but at a church where, according to the devout agraféna
pursuing them. he could already see how these men, who looked so small
“on the contrary, that coiffure suits the princess very well,” said

loved that man. what has become of him? is he alive?...
her plainly as she is, or else you will make a cruel and irrevocable
on a chair in the ballroom, crossing one leg high over the other,
continued all through teatime. all the grown-up members of the family
“yes, but what am i to do?... i try not to show...”
unintentionally, he poured too many drops into the glass. he threw the

like a wail, first one hound, then another, and then another, sprang

“yes, your excellency. what are your orders about vereshchágin? he is
asking for orders about their departure. (this was before his talk with
“why should we give up everything? we don’t agree. don’t agree.... we
beloved nobility and my good peasants and so use the last resources of
looked at telyánin. the lieutenant was looking about in his usual way

calls.’”
attack a weaker one and annihilate him, or at least oblige him to

“oh, well then, good-by: go and dress. is he very terrible,
“máshka’s sweet root.” it was very bitter, but they wandered
in the apocalypse. moreover, by applying the same system to the words
arrange it,” and she rushed forward so that the maids who were tacking
inhabitants, but he also thought he controlled their mental attitude by

quietly without alarming them and then, after joining dólokhov who was
where what he had seen was.

from choking, sónya, pale and trembling with fear and agitation, sat
madame de souza. he began reading about the sufferings and virtuous
remained alone with him for a long time.
afraid of being late for matins. hastily washing, and meekly putting on

from the day his wife arrived in moscow pierre had been intending to go
they were meaningless.
clock. one wheel slowly moved, another was set in motion, and a third,
vasíli, his cheeks twitching more than ever.
was now replaced by another, especially since he had seen that soldier
circle and, as he supposed, of similar interests.
and grieved had he chosen not to see them. these different
ecstasies over “uncle’s” singing. she resolved to give up learning
the doctor said this restlessness did not mean anything and was due
andrew went to one and took out a small casket, from which he drew a
“get him to his place and give him some water,” said rostóv,
with a piece of (broken but mended) glass in it for a window. when it
brushed head. he looked at the rostóvs from under his brows and said

in front of them, and that the columns moving near pratzen constituted
up to túshin.
really did.
    chapter xv
that soldier’s breast for the soldier to be forever happy, rewarded,
you a place in my carriage. i am very glad. all our important business

when the count came to see her she turned anxiously round at the sound
before the door opened and countess bezúkhova, dressed in a purple
way, and far from spoiling the high tone and general impression of the


in the sound of his voice, in the stirring and deafening noise of the



    chapter xxiii
through the same sufferings...”


smile. alexander was saying something affable to him.
know in what capacity he was questioned by bennigsen, the grand duke,
higher to natásha and said, with a pleasant smile, that the young
to look at her now, and she glanced round quite disconcerted.
“i don’t say it’s a plan i approve of,” said the son; “i am



remember....”
fell from him. he was glad, and at the same instant began to pity the
look into the matter can easily convince himself.
still merrier, and some of them could not refrain from laughter, for
between ourselves, was very far gone in the land of tenderness...”
everyone knelt down and sang a prayer. all these things were repeatedly
stake is what is dearest to man—his own life—and it sometimes seems that
“why joke?” said the driver, laughing. “as if i’d grudge my
hinder their bliss. love would conquer all. he would steal her away and
“i ordered you not to let them eat that máshka woot stuff!”
suggested to him a point of view which gave him a right to despise
round her head.
natásha, throwing a clean pocket handkerchief over her hair and holding
when she began to tell him that all this had happened the day after her

that lofty, infinite canopy of heaven that had once towered above him

people.
humor and dissatisfied with the affair, and so did not exert themselves

“yes, it was death! i died—and woke up. yes, death is an awakening!” and
in him.
round shoulders shuddered as if a cold shiver had run down them, how his
she raised her hand to prince andrew’s shoulder. they were the second
ask her what he had been saying, and be vexed if he noticed that she
had finished his story someone else was anxious to relate something
spoken to the gentleman ranker, he addressed him with the cordiality of
lavrúshka, understanding that this was done to perplex him and that
“do you see?... my doll... mimi... you see...” was all natásha
quickly, went out of the shed, and began to walk about.

gentlemen” as he called them. he had ruined more than one horse in
found, and the whole pack, joining together, rushed along the ravine
degree embarrassing for the russians, as the most adroit diplomatists of
ladies. natásha came into the room, went up to sónya, glanced at
princess mary noticed to her surprise that during this illness the
essence of the matter aside, shut out the possibility of that essence’s
some wounded here—officers. will you let them come? they have nowhere to


peace so long as a single armed enemy remained on russian soil and told
frenchwoman very readily and, looking at her with a smile, talked to her
“yes,” whispered natásha.
becoming more distant.
“yes, i am a mason,” pierre replied.
the welfare of the charitable and educational institutions under her
in time to be fired at. toll, who in this battle played the part of
the spot chosen for the duel was some eighty paces from the road,
the adjutant in attendance came into the tent.
grateful to her benefactors, and so faithfully, unchangingly, and

and everything annoyed her—denísov’s shouting and laughter, natásha’s
the face and with bloodshot eyes, dragged mítenka out by the scruff of
“i am glad i have spoken out fully. perhaps you did not like it? you
hopeless movement with his arm and went away.
better not think of it—not till he comes back!” she told herself,
on externals. he did not think of doubting freemasonry itself, but

murder of the duc d’enghien. the vicomte said that the duc d’enghien
“only not for this...” pierre suddenly exclaimed with a laugh, and
had just struck a chord.
berg was satisfied and happy. the smile of pleasure never left his face.
easy to be an interesting man (i am an interesting man now); people
nicholas went out into the wet and muddy porch. there was a smell of
of sónya, who blushed and smiled unnaturally. in the midst of his talk
were solely engaged in sacrificing themselves, saving their fatherland,


superintendent’s trap which drove into the square attended by two
object that lay on the salver. it was the order of st. george of the
“well, and what are you going to do? will you stay here if the enemy
through openings in the earthwork.
ourselves of the absolute inaccessibility of the causes, and then
from his mother, written without his father’s knowledge, and that

while imprisoned in the shed pierre had learned not with his intellect

and anatole met in the conservatory.
prince.
getting neither better nor worse. he was unconscious and lay like
undermining c, and so on in all possible combinations and permutations.

she ran to meet her, embraced her, and began to cry on her shoulder.
all the same, to the next house which seemed to them better. many of
(the captain of whom the corporal spoke often had long chats with pierre
distance, though the collision had deprived it of all its force.
brother-in-law bezúkhov to pay off debts he regarded as genuinely due
“and tell mademoiselle bourienne not to come to me,” she added, hearing
sorry that she was being wasted all this time and of no use to
“well, send for him... and how do you get on with that german?”
fixed above his head. then he took out a knife, cut something, closed
“if the count had been at home...” mávra kuzmínichna went on
health?”
man is the creation of an all-powerful, all-good, and all-seeing god.
mood. all alike were taciturn and morose. talk was rarely heard in the
quarter of his army he would certainly lose moscow. for kutúzov this was
that the ismáylov regiment was quartered for the night ten miles from
oldenburg; for had he not wished to serve, and had a second, a third,

pierre still went into society, drank as much and led the same idle
though some skeptics smiled when told of berg’s merits, it could not
the contrary, the deviations made from his theory were, in his opinion,
twenty-five-ruble assignat and hastily handed it to him.


túshin did not say that there were no covering troops, though that

out of the question to be under french rule, it would be the worst thing

understanding of his employer’s happiness.
the intention was to make a stand at the drissa camp, but paulucci,
“yes, i know you have made peace with the turks without obtaining
the little princess lay supported by pillows, with a white cap on her
“yes, but between ourselves,” said the princess, “that is a
victory over buonaparte at eylau. in petersburg everyone is rejoicing,
feet that moved through the sticky mud that covered the planks of the

not to the fourth but to the fifteenth of october—that plan never was or
“yes,” she said, looking at his altered face after he had kissed her
listened to orders. fifteen hundred prisoners and thirty-eight guns were
no one replied. natásha rose slowly and carefully, crossed herself, and
freedom not limited by anything is the essence of life, in man’s
of austerlitz, but wore a tight new uniform with russian and foreign

gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
which he himself did not understand.
their motion are unknown to us) continued to operate.
considers himself bound to maintain his position worthily.”
circumstances, and his mother having at one time mentioned her to him as


the wind fell, as if it dared not spoil the beauty of the summer morning
put a little aside and to send something to my father,” he went on,
was attached to plátov’s division.
pushed the guns and wagons themselves. whips cracked, hoofs slipped,

emperors were to be present at that banquet.

“do you understand what you’re saying?” he said in a trembling
vorónezh. when rostóv approached her she was standing settling up for


on the day of his rescue he had seen the body of pétya rostóv. that same
“i knew you’d give permission... so i’ll tell them,” and, having kissed

of it. prince andrew” (he always spoke thus of his son) “has been
not a logical answer and not at all a reply to them. the answer was:
mustache.
had no idea and could not imagine what state he was in, all i wanted was
within half an hour adjutants had been sent in various directions with
glory, the good of society, love of a woman, the fatherland itself—how
“a member without salary,” repeated arakchéev. “i have the
legs, looked directly at prince vasíli with no sign of emotion in her

to hand the squadron over to the next in seniority and appear before
to cheer the men but merely carried out the orders), yet the troops

“eh? yes, i heard something: he said something awkward in his


troops were no longer moving, but stood with the butts of their muskets
indicating the rostóvs’ box. on seeing natásha pierre grew animated

and at last became silent.
into which alexander the great had marched—napoleon unexpectedly, and

“in that case...” began willarski, but pierre interrupted him.

retainers, shouted authoritatively that the superfluous ones should take
hurry, the meeting with the courier who talked casually of how badly
and she therefore asked pierre to tell his brother-in-law in her name to

of deep bass voices, and in the intervals sighs and the shuffling of
all that we know of the life of man is merely a certain relation of free
he remarked:
the hall facing an elderly woman of oriental type, who came rapidly to
he did not like talking about his life as a soldier, though he did not

the color of muddy water. at times a sort of mist descended, and then
i speak to him?”
the cone and its base. the soldier himself does the stabbing, hacking,
may—then out of all the continually expressed wishes of different people
moscow; then he suddenly ran away from moscow, and the emperor
and went to the further end of his study. having stood there a few
the nurse brought it to him and nodded approval when she told him that
arrival in petersburg he received only his due. i always wonder at the
slender, delicate arm, high above the elbow on that part that is covered
to the nízhni fair with a companion—a rich merchant.

was the count at last handed a letter addressed in his son’s
hippolyte is at least a quiet fool, but anatole is an active one. that
from which the shouting came. he felt both frightened and pleased to be
pity, and when she wept her radiant eyes acquired an irresistible charm.
of blessedness which now flooded his heart with glad emotion.
the collective will was transferred to him.
moved. no one can say in how far it is possible for man to advance
“but for god’s sake, be careful, you know how it may affect your

away.
