“This won’t do, Princess; it won’t do,” said he, when Princess

never was much to my liking. Of course he is an excellent man, but
position impossible and therefore could not go to fight, fully convinced
“What does harm to another is wrong,” said Pierre, feeling with
shoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by something extraordinary
vision. Now that she knew that the renewal of Natásha’s relations with
During this halt the escort treated the prisoners even worse than they
he returned with the horse all in a lather, he informed Lavrúshka

in general I can tell you, Papa, that such a heroic spirit, the truly
up, now vanishing, now trembling, they were busy whispering something
“You promised Countess Rostóva to marry her and were about to elope with

excitement.
I go in then? What could he have done to me? What could I have lost? And
behind him and brightly lit up the enormous panorama which, rising like
the way of life there unchanged and still the same in every detail.
continued Rapp. “The wine is drawn and must be drunk.”
Pétya who always kept close to her, by Michael, a huntsman, and by a
and the magnate had proposed to her and that she loved both and was
these documents, and he wrote to the German that, despite his heartfelt
“Go, Tit, thresh a bit!” said the wag.

with Bazdéev’s notes and explanations. He sat down at the dusty writing
turn away from the sight, shouting angrily at the men who, as is always
and legs always fell into unnatural positions.
smoke, rendered denser by the mist, prevented him from seeing anything
as I write?
infantry.
his state was very critical, but the doctor said there was now more
“No, not on any account! I will tell him myself, and you’ll listen
day... Natásha, what have I done to deserve it?...”
Glory, which was similar to those threads but rather thicker. He and
rarely done of late. It was a grand farewell dinner, as he and Denísov

“There are so many prisoners today, nearly the whole Russian army,
necessary,” said the younger of the two speakers, evidently in the


that in spite of Karatáev’s affectionate tenderness for him (by which
poorer than the poorest beggar. A thousand thanks, dear friend, for the

and a certain kind of civilization of a small corner of the world called
admitted to the Emperor. But it was impossible to smarten oneself up

happiness or peace of mind. Can anything in the world make her or me
till now. But where am I?”

before her whom he loved and who loved him? Had he expected to live he
comfort, seemed to her a wearisome and artificial obligation. She could
    CHAPTER XVI
nearer to the window. She was evidently leaning right out, for the
and takes bribes. What nonsense! Besides, why shouldn’t he take bribes?
Mary Hendríkhovna assented and began looking for the spoon which someone
is all I have to say to you. The count is very, very ill, and you must
not leave his face.
did not now say those former terrible words to him, but looked simply,
Nicholas put all his horses to a gallop and passed Zakhár. The horses
her own fate and guardian and instructor of her nephew, was the first to
amazement appeared on the Emperor’s face. He took Balashëv by the arm
country house in the far distance.


other before the service was concluded. Pierre paid no more attention
that the relations between him and herself could lead to love on her


seeing the fright of that small and frail but proud man when covered by

turning into the village already... they will have their buckwheat

had sinned against God. One told how he had taken a life, another had
“Yes, it seems he is ill. People are always disturbing him,”
the cold in his head at Borodinó to the sparks which set Moscow on
have no end.

a girl, such tact, such masterly perfection of manner! It comes from


This campaign consisted in a flight of the French during which they did

“And I have known so many cases of a splinter wound” (the Gazette said
greatly improved during these last five years, having softened and grown
it!”
“Theodore Iványch!” he said, bowing.
the French with his whole army was impossible. The road for the French
and distinctly. In the valley he saw before him something like a river,
the campaign and the two battles in which he had taken part, and his
behind the times, and had sunk, as he expressed it to himself, into
“I say, Father, joking apart, is she very hideous?” Anatole asked,
“Pierre was right when he said one must believe in the possibility of
“Her niece, Princess Bolkónskaya. She is here in Vorónezh with her aunt.
That simple, modest, and therefore truly great, figure could not be
“I knew you would be here,” replied Pierre. “I will come to supper
cathedrals. The longer the French remained the more these forms of town

proves that consciousness is not subject to reason.
It was rumored that Savary had been sent to propose to Alexander
are destroyed. Napoleon himself is no longer of any account; all his
“Weren’t you asleep?”

“My father, to whom I have told my plans, has made it an express
and moving noiselessly in his bast shoes over the roots and wet leaves,
CHAPTER XVIII
“And love of one’s neighbor, and self-sacrifice?” began Pierre.

anything, Dólokhov, looking straight in his face, said slowly and
“The hours are the same, and the lathe, and also the mathematics and

waistcoat. “It’s the sauté, most likely,” she added with a smile.
heard.
“All right, all right,” he said, throwing the bits under the table.
admitted that he had been to blame, did not lift his eyes from the
on her toes any longer. “So that’s what I’m up to! I’ll never
continued, “we owe today’s success chiefly to the action of that

moved forward.
no account have told a deliberate lie. He began his story meaning to
butler, napkin on arm, was scanning the setting of the table, making
was already too late to go anywhere but still too early to go to bed,
“But where is it?”

noticed Rostóv coming upstairs.

on all sides. The countess rose and went into the ballroom.
distressed that his stout and clumsy body took up so much room and doing
“But anything suits you, my charmer!” she remarked.
affair. I am her father.”
“That would be fine, gentlemen!”
“Give it to him, then,” said Anatole.
life.

and even an emperor. Before leaving, Napoleon showed favor to the
“Excuse my coming to you, cousin,” she said in a reproachful and
conceive a future life...”

impetuously toward the embankment to watch the firing. Pétya too would
jumped up, jerking the rings of the leashes and pricking their ears.
and confiding affection for his sister. He wrote that he had never loved
of general, merry laughter.
the affair had come to an actual duel). “You know, Count, it is much
and more than forty borzois, so that, with the borzois on the leash
CHAPTER VII
While the couples were arranging themselves and the musicians tuning up,
attempts made to keep in mind the difficulties of the actual position.
was going, to Mítenka’s lodge and demanded an account of everything.


good-naturedly, pointing to Natásha, “only brightens up when you’re
widows of live men, make beautiful conversations over our charpie, only
The wind had fallen and black clouds, merging with the powder smoke,
“Yes, really...”


It was plain that Balashëv’s personality did not interest him at all.
asked with a slight smile. “I guessed it then when we met at the

At that moment, as the Horse Guards, having passed him, disappeared in

“The highest wisdom is not founded on reason alone, not on those
The steward did not say it was quite impossible, but suggested selling
dissipated their property—that being the chief fault of which he was
administrative, and financial, from the Council of State down to the

“Devil take them!” he muttered, and after listening to the verbal
moment in which the first movement was made is irrevocable, and at that
A French corporal, with coat unbuttoned in a homely way, a skullcap on
Sónya burst into hysterical tears and replied through her sobs that
lying on the wolf’s back among the dogs, trying to seize her by the
French corps, and by way of reporting their intention to Kutúzov they
the enemy, had taken prisoners, and once had even captured Marshal
does not quite see it; more particularly as it is he and his corps who
“It’s a long time since we met,” he said. “Thanks for coming.
CHAPTER X
When they went into the drawing room where coffee was served, the old
in some way essential.

at the merchant Brónnikov’s house, in the Square not far from here,
patriotic fervor as not merely secondary but quite irrelevant and

“Oh, Heaven! How ill he is!” exclaimed the mother.
their present situation.
gavest Moses the victory over Amalek, Gideon over Midian, and David over
commander in chief.
“Ah, Wostóv? How are you, how are you?” he called out, still in the
ranks.

He seated himself more comfortably and coughed, evidently preparing to
the whole approach on that side of it. Through the smoke glimpses could

this name day of hers had been one of the pleasantest she had ever had.
queer,” he added after a pause, “that you should have suspected

been told to report.
shrine of the Mother of God and to Madame Suppert-Roguet, who was so
    * “Who goes there?”

Pierre went to the children, and the shouting and laughter grew still
everything and running away from home. In imagination she already
“It is long since we had the pleasure...” began the countess,
unusually intelligent, charming... and then she is pretty, uncommonly
“You remember when I looked in the mirror for you... at Otrádnoe at
CHAPTER I
more as he looked at Pierre.
And from the different ranks some twenty men ran to the front. A
horse, rode up to the porch, swung his leg over the saddle with a supple
*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAR AND PEACE ***
is a passage in them that just fits Sónya.”


Bolkhovítinov told him everything and was then silent, awaiting

eyes that seemed to say: “Ah, there he is! Let’s see what will come of

prompted by vanity and pettiness.
    CHAPTER IX
Julie wrote in French:

would rather wash himself with water in the barn.
lovely! She is quite equal to Márya Antónovna. See how the men, young
The two remarkably pretty girls, Natásha and Sónya, with Count Rostóv
to fire and sword. The inhabitants are totally ruined, the hospitals
The officer, evidently glad of an opportunity for a talk, moved up to
with a sigh. This might have been taken as an expression of sorrow
Pierre no longer suffered moments of despair, hypochondria, and disgust
joyful, and amused smile now habitual to him, was interested in this
“Take this, little Lady-Countess!” she kept saying, as she offered
me,” thought Natásha—“is it possible that I am now to be the

angry with the travelers and would immediately turn them out, had she
“Well, and is that all?” he asked.
Rhetor said, “to bring yourself to regard it not as a dreaded foe, but
diligently named. More than half the ladies already had partners
the thought that little Nicholas would be left without a father. With
on this high ground, shall withdraw the left flank under its cover, and
in good spirits, he mounted his horse and rode out into the field
that he should do the same. The rider, whose figure seemed familiar
Pierre seized the crossbeam, tugged, and wrenched the oak frame out with

guitar and at once found the chords of the song.
At midnight dancing was still going on. Hélène, not having a suitable
    CHAPTER XIV
up after four o’clock. The people did not at once realize the meaning of
Thanks to Anna Mikháylovna’s efforts, his own tastes, and the
In the Emperor’s suite all exchanged rapid looks that expressed
securing that peace was really Kutúzov’s; this Chichagóv was the first
“Now for the recitation!” said Speránski on returning from
scattered his forces in large detachments, and with Napoleon and his
diplomatists and monarchs nearly quarreled and were on the point of

us. Well, you want an argument,” he added, “come on then.”
seat.

Rostopchín’s broadsheets, headed by woodcuts of a drink shop, a potman,
And now there’s Dólokhov sitting in the snow with a forced smile and
that there is any connection between intellectual activity and the
who had been robbed and was in rags and did not know how to get out of
“Yes, that is true, Prince. In our days,” continued

happiness. And those thoughts, though now vague and indefinite, again
of his own. The difference between his former and present self was that
out there... both playing the hero... Ah, Vasíli Ignátovich...
anxious to be presented to Prince Nicholas Bolkónski, and had contrived
of Mack’s defeat, the camp life of the officers of this squadron was

every corner of the Empire, receiving complaints, redressing wrongs,
“Where have you to go to? Tell us!” said one of them.


herself recalling to the minutest detail every word, every gesture, and
Alexander’s Guards,” said the first one, indicating a Russian



The prince was surprised that so simple an idea had not occurred to him,
another at the same time they both began to speak. Pierre began with
the first fortification. General Campan’s division did not seize the
Now her face and body were often all that one saw, and her soul was
mouth full of false teeth, as if she were trying to cheat old age....
soldiers, taking advantage of the stoppage and congestion, turned back
room.

with a much stronger enemy, and necessarily withdrawing the armies at
magnanimous. She felt convinced of that. Thousands of dreams of a future


he is so frank and has so much heart. He is so pure and poetic that
whip in the sand when a calèche dashed up noisily. A man in a general’s
hopes of saving his life. She took turns with her beside his sofa, and
formed a definite idea of what an attack was and were expecting to hear
forehead as he stooped to kiss her hand. She wished to love him as a
The invasion pushes eastward and reaches its final goal—Moscow. That

Rostóv became thoughtful.
“And what is she so pleased about?” thought Nicholas, looking at his

just saying so myself,” though a moment before he had said quite the
Lorrain’s instructions. The German doctor went up to Lorrain.
only the whites were seen, and on his bare legs and arms which were



Particularly vivid, humiliating, and shameful was the recollection of
everyone in the house, and never forgot anything. If he now incurred

old man, extended his arms and embraced him. And this embrace too, owing
the prince. “And if you allow yourself,” he screamed in a fury,
The crowd drew up to the large table, at which sat gray-haired or bald
expressed his feelings, and has since become famous. On returning home
mistakes, on craft, or on the weakness of a diplomatist, a ruler, or a
mean to fight, let’s fight. But the devil knows what this is.”
said Natásha.
behind. One of them said something strange, not in Russian. In among the

whole army, from its chiefs to the lowest soldier, without exception in
manly-looking, but what amazed and estranged Pierre till he got used
impulsive man who had always moved in the highest administrative circles
tenths of the men of our left flank had fallen and the full force of the
and put the matter before the Emperor,” said Princess Anna
and brought with them, Ramballe invited Pierre to share his dinner, and


French, turning to a general, “my husband is deserting me? He is going
The moan of that wounded beast (the French army) which betrayed its
“And to drink,” said one of the officers, not wishing to quarrel.
definition of power needs explanation.
noticeable gap on one side of his mouth; in character he was the same as

bed.
“Now then, go away and take your monstrosity with you,” said the
and to get away as soon as Mademoiselle George’s performance was over.
inquisitive?”
“Well, supposing I do love him?” thought Princess Mary.
and the more he talked the less could he control his words.
“There’s no need for you to go at all,” said Denísov, addressing
Rostóv’s soul (it seemed to Rostóv that he understood everything),
war. He evidently listened only because he had ears which, though there
effected the dangerous crossing of the Straits of Dover and captured


to Prince Andrew.
what I have seen during these last three months is incredible.
spring a new disease broke out among the soldiers, a swelling of the
He paused and sighed, evidently trying to calm himself.
intemperance, and his mouth twitched nervously. The general looked the
expression. Véra was good-looking, not at all stupid, quick at
“I am.”
championship of the doctor’s wife in her queer trap might expose him
I was quite little that used to be so with me. Do you remember when
and that tomorrow everyone would be sent out beyond the Three Hills
at close quarters as at a distance, sat down beside her and told her he
in silence and frowning angrily.
paced the room with her. There was an expression of carefree happiness
with you alone! God knows how long we may again be parted. You are not


“You are perfectly at liberty to treat me with respect or not,”

happiness—floated continually in her imagination like temptations of the

The consciousness that this would be so and would always be so was and
she could see her again.
“The sovereigns? I do not speak of Russia,” said the vicomte, polite

for however man’s free will may be restricted, as soon as we recognize
his colonel.
“It’s the business of us soldiers. But in a gentleman it’s wonderful!
but managed meanwhile to look round repeatedly at his neighbor, the
    CHAPTER III
general roar.
Anna Pávlovna’s presentiment was in fact fulfilled. Next day during the
the experience of old Cunctators.”
something unusual, something they would have to accept as the regular
after the attack, Bogdánich would come up to him as he lay wounded and

terrible dragon, a lady distinguished not for wealth or rank, but for
infinite motion without a moment of rest and is unthinkable otherwise.

“Wostóv, get up!”
“Still, don’t ruin yourself!” said Dólokhov with a side glance at
well.”
he said in a low voice:
that episode as of some childish, long-forgotten matter that was not
After a while the moving mass became agitated, someone rode past on
battery and the heroic endurance of Captain Túshin and his company,”
by that irresistible passion for sport which makes a man forget all
speaking to himself and bowing his head with a sad but firm expression.
voices.
As Pierre approached that street the smoke became denser and denser—he
He told of his adventures as he had never yet recalled them. He now, as
furlough after Christmas to return with him to their regiment. His

Pierre continued. When he spoke of the execution he wanted to pass
Bald Hills and was sitting indoors reading the Lives of the Saints. On
spring!”
their enemy unexpectedly the French fell into confusion and stopped
blackened to the wrists. There were sounds of men slapping one another,
entanglements of life, he was living so calmly and quietly. He felt that
asleep at a council, and has the very worst morals! A good reputation

maneuvers or plans, again began running along the beaten track, neither
I don’t want any of them! And what are they doing here?” she thought.
having occurred and an understanding between us will be possible. In
“Oh yes,” she answered. “You noticed nothing?” her look asked.
but this dreadful incessant moaning made her sob. The countess exchanged
tomorrow such and such decrees and orders to the army, the fleet, the
the light of men. And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness
Platón Karatáev (of whom he had heard from Pierre), his love for Natásha
understanding of her condition expressed.

from everybody else.
heard that the war was being discussed had turned from his partner with
thou noticed that my face is different?” I looked at him, still
separate portions of the French army—first Murat’s (the vice-king’s),
his energy and persistence had attained power, which he was using solely
“The fact of the matter is,” said she significantly, and also in a
manners, who evidently considered himself a celebrity but out of
she remained alone with him for a moment. Prince Andrew surprised her by
captured from the French beside which horses were tethered, that under
Valúevo with Colonel Fabvier, the former from Paris and the latter from
Augesd.

“Everything’s still the same with them,” thought Nicholas,
the initiator of a settlement of any sort. Such is the present spirit
them.”
command, I shall let my beard grow to here” (he pointed halfway down his
about. And so there was no one cause for that occurrence, but it had
and scented myself.”

for three months. He had what the doctors termed “bilious fever.” But
this life temporarily; but then he was shocked by the thought of how
employ dangerous remedies.
Princess Mary had made an agreeable impression on him when he had met
the pale face and shining eyes of the very Natásha of whom he had just
up with fear as if he every moment expected another blow, gazed up at
with the rank of lieutenant; but as it is I receive two hundred and

needed to exercise her tongue and lungs. She cried as a child does,
her feeling grief for her brother with full force; on the contrary, that
“All right!” said Dólokhov, having finished the addition. “All
not now occur to him to think of Russia, or the war, or politics, or
man with white hands who was doing something to him and, still standing
a headache began to say good night.
CHAPTER I
of the action may be—can we ever conceive either complete freedom or
The chill that had been running down Pierre’s back now seized his head
to each other simply because the masses involved are equal or unequal.


rather than of what the generals were disputing about.
with his hands, down which the grease trickled, Pétya was in an ecstatic
Count Rostopchín suddenly grew pale as he had done when the crowd closed
mysterious limitless vistas that for an instant had opened out before
her soul, and it seemed as if she could never finish. Several times she
and suddenly two old women began spinning round on the carpet? Was that
The whole battle consisted in what Orlóv-Denísov’s Cossacks had done:
have been more surprised than Mademoiselle Bourienne at the change that



shall perish of my debauchery if Thou utterly desertest me!

instead of firing it, flung it at the Frenchman and ran with all his
are false.
fluttered, grew into harmonies, separated, blended, and again all
had in fact slipped. For a moment as he was rearranging his cloak Pierre
his leave.
with the smell of honey. There are no longer sentinels sounding the
from his pocket began asking the officer in how far the road before them
to the big table. Not only was Pierre’s attempt to speak unsuccessful,
most of all he liked to hear stories of real life. He would smile

Sónya, with a quiver in her voice due chiefly to the attention that was
“I don’t know what the reasons are. But there must be reasons!”
right to left—maintained their extended position from the village of
“A likely thing, killing a fox our dogs had hunted! And it was my gray
     http://www.gutenberg.org
the theater of war and on the army’s direct line of march, and advised
at Krems excited but not weary, with dispatches from Dokhtúrov to
Anna Mikháylovna’s was the most distinct.
battle. Pierre saw that there was a bridge in front of him and that

the best position for an army when it is not being attacked is where
out until, at the first pause, the guests rise with a rustle of dresses

himself and Natásha could not be binding either on her or on him. He
When, much later, “Uncle” rode up to Nicholas and began talking

involuntary shudder ran down his spine. In the corporal’s changed face,
more clearly than he had done before, now that he was sure of being
women’s gloves, he said: “Dear brother, these woman’s gloves are
thought and which had formerly seemed to her so far away and improbable,
don’t go. I will order supper. Go downstairs, we will come immediately.”
un bâtard!”* she added, as if supposing that this translation of the
Wussians will get a look in. As it was, devil only knows what was
closer bound he involuntarily became to the order. When he had joined
right above the Vólga,” said the courier.


neck, and his head, that had been half shaved, was again covered by
theory.
quarter of his army he would certainly lose Moscow. For Kutúzov this was
find the baby. At last he saw him: the rosy boy had tossed about till he
buttoning up his uniform. It seemed that he had quite forgotten Pierre.
The hounds were joined into one pack, and “Uncle” and Nicholas rode
suffering, but what he wanted to do was too terrible.

“It’s horrid! It’s abominable!” she screamed. “You can’t possibly have
“Prince,” said Berg, recognizing Prince Andrew, “I only spoke because

Wolzogen came to the assistance of his chief, who spoke French badly,
Dessalles with whom she constantly conversed was passionately interested
of his words for the solemnity of the moment, as he spoke. “I
avenue at a gallop.
the part of a doctor who hinders by his medicines—a role he so justly
When he had reported himself to the commander of the regiment and had
Italian, oblivious of decorum, followed him and continued to speak.
to block its path. This was shown not so much by the arrangements it
a commander in chief. As it was considered that the Austerlitz success
himself undertook his daughter’s education, and to develop these two
he sad at leaving his wife?—perhaps both, but evidently he did not

heaven knows what about him.... What do you think of him?”
remember....”

Magnítski’s words were again crowned by laughter. Stolýpin gave
on!” innumerable voices suddenly shouted after the ball had struck
and asked how much he owed.
“But what are you shouting for? Calm yourself,” said Rostóv.
here for?” He rose and went up to Borís.

down in an armchair and burst into tears.
all I have to tell you. Happy he who has ears to hear. Good-by, my dear
“Yes, my dear Monsieur Pierre, I owe you a fine votive candle for
first approximation to a cause that seems to him intelligible and says:
the study—that was in the old house—and it was dark—we went in and
Prince Michael Ilariónovich! Since the twenty-ninth of August I have


“My mother! My mother, my angel, my adored angel mother,” and
foolish as soon as he uttered them, while on the contrary Hippolyte’s

“Isn’t she a Tartar!”
jest—that if Andrew got married he himself would marry Bourienne—had
thought. And suddenly, at this thought of death, a whole series of most
abandoning their belongings and proving by that negative action all
understood him. The old man got up and gave the letter to his son.

the host’s father and mother, and of himself in military uniform. The
reasonable to them all.
in the Gáchina suburb across the Dnieper, at the inn kept by Ferapóntov,
feeling; sharing with the young folk of the Rostóvs’ household a

to the window.
A church procession was coming up the hill from Borodinó. First along
his portrait, “definitely demanded that he should be called.”
French, German, and Latin, blamed one another, and prescribed a great
Kaiser Alexander hoch!” *(2) said he, quoting words often repeated by
and that they must retreat, Kutúzov looked at him in silence.
From the officer down to the lowest soldier they showed what seemed like
accent—having noticed that Zherkóv could still hear him.

inability to enter a room and converse in it was, however, redeemed by
to the Imperial family as well as to all Moscow and Petersburg, and both


wounded—had left it long ago. All about the field, like heaps of
pockets had seized her by the neck.
“Fool, I told you the sable one! Hey, Matrëna, the sable!” he shouted so
then so, do you see?” and he pushed Anatole’s head forward to meet the
and at the table... who do you think? No, but wait a bit!... Who is it
little Nicholas, and religion—and these were the favorite subjects
face it gave him a burning sensation and yet to his surprise it did not
replying.
Austrian general, continuing to read, frowned angrily and jerked his
to suggest that Russia had saved Europe) “do any harm? The Tugendbund
“It was the officer, your honor, stained it,” answered the
sister-in-law’s friendship for you. She was not expecting us?”
fill whole volumes to demonstrate their merits, when they relate to a
the east to the west form the essence and purpose of these events, and
extrémités de l’univers, nous allons lui faire éprouver le même

before the heights on which the Russian batteries stood guarding the
so easily extract a good profit for themselves from a dinner costing
commence the action, and wishing to avert responsibility from himself,
with a bottle wrapped in a napkin passed him by. He frowned, trying to

charming age when a girl is no longer a child, though the child is not
confusion, the most important results of the whole campaign were
provender which might have saved it from starvation, disintegrated and

When, awakened from his sleep, he received that cold, peremptory note
“Ah!... Alpátych... Ah, Yákov Alpátych... Grand! Forgive us for Christ’s
pressed against the wall of a charred house, listening to that noise


had gone out somewhere and with whom he wanted a talk.

cease seeing you; and if you won’t do this, I will. I will write to
and Tíkhon a hero too, and that it would be shameful for him to leave
“To Mozháysk.”
to my rudeness while I on the contrary nourish contempt for him. O God,

but there was no other fire, and Pierre sat down, trying not to look at
off his courage, had ridden on to the planks of the bridge:
which—in spite of the purity and loftiness of his inner man—he does
After Kaysárov, others whom Pierre knew came up to him, and he had not

old lady, who was always kind to me and to whom I am under many
Just as in a dream when all is uncertain, unreasoning, and

“Oh, there was childish love?” suddenly asked Prince Andrew,
red-faced peasant in the forties, with thick lips, a broad knob of a
necessity of going back on his word. With a sinking heart he watched
with a beautiful Polish lady on the veranda of his house in Kiev. And
his feverishness increased and he grew delirious. Visions of his father,
I alone have any influence with my father, and now and then can save him
“Who’s to put it out?” Daniel Teréntich, who had hitherto been silent,
Dólokhov with his feet turned under him. “It’s the very devil!
began to arrive; and slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her
officer joined in the colonel’s appeals, but Bagratión did not reply;
though whenever he offered it Pierre always declined it.
preparations for it with unparalleled solemnity. This Kutúzov who before

added.

When, having bought the coat merely with the object of taking part among
drawing room.
were turned against the ten-gun battery. Túshin’s companion officer
alive—live: tomorrow you’ll die as I might have died an hour ago.

generals were saying.
some reason she called it Urope as if that were a specially refined
that the hussars must return quickly and fire the bridge.’”
him, Prince Andrew on the eve of battle felt agitated and irritable as
he lacked that strength of will which he had known in himself and really
the final proof that events had matured. The tightly coiled spring was
On being relieved from picket duty Rostóv had managed to get a few
“You know, I adore little girls, they lose their heads at once,”
misdirected will, and that the very ideas of 1789 were arrested in their
accept this terrible necessity sternly and seriously. It all lies in
“Tut, tut, tut! Tell that to others,” said the officer, waving his
old man, shaking his powdered head as much as the tail, which Tíkhon
“Mary, dear, I think he is asleep—he was so tired,” said Sónya, meeting
were doing something near the pit, with pale faces and trembling hands.
“It doesn’t matter to me. I only wish it for your sake.”
had to be ordered to keep the “will” in.

long time past. She felt that something had happened to him, but he said
saying: “They will swell up with Russian cabbage, burst with our
“She said.... Oh yes! She said, ‘Girl,’ to the maid, ‘put on a
“Wonderful!” answered Natásha. “She’s a woman one could easily
fearing to be captured by the French on the way to Krems.
illegitimate.”
her mother’s head this way and that, she fastened on the cap and,
conscience that God has implanted in our souls.”
waiting to see what he would do. He stood a little while before the

evil. Le prochain—your Kiev peasants to whom you want to do good.”


The princess did not fall down or faint. She was already pale, but on

himself on the breast as a general he had heard speaking had done, but
the sergeant to meet some mounted men who were riding along the line.
at the sky to which Pierre had pointed, and for the first time since

moving, naturally imagines that his efforts move the ship he is holding
“No, there’s not much to be amused at here,” said Rostóv, and rode on a

face of the old man and seeking any indication of his being a traitor.
“Everything has been spoiled, everything muddled, everybody thought they
of factory hands, house serfs, and peasants, with whom some officials,
The count went into the house with him, repeating his order not to
to snatch it from one another. The expression on all their faces
the boy’s hand. “Entrez, entrez.” *(2)
time turn out to be mistaken in his view of what is good for humanity.
doubt him, but he seemed to me insincere, and all the time I stood
But Sónya? And his plighted word? That was why Rostóv grew angry when he
clearly, her pulse beat a hundred to the minute, and the blood throbbed
unconsciously, she opened and closed her hand in time to the music,
“You need not have said that to me, Father,” said the son with a

army, as the sequel showed. Had Napoleon’s aim been to destroy his army,
confirmed Natásha’s assurances that nothing had happened. From
here and there the blackened walls of some brick houses. Pierre gazed
Prince Andrew glanced at Timókhin, who looked at his commander in alarm
I am again living with my wife. My mother-in-law came to me in tears and
and went to the door. Suddenly the strange sound of a far-off whistling

attracted him just as much as ever, but that he must not yield to that
will do so.... So you see there can be no question about—” said Nicholas

am sitting on a barrel and working in a dirty shed?” the expression of
was silent and then from the study the sound was heard of other steps,
importance and that no time must be lost. He did not consider or ask

Everything seemed so futile and insignificant in comparison with the
Andrew. Prince Andrew seemed, and really was, quite a different, quite


“Oh yes, another thing! Please, my dear fellow, will you sharpen my
Natásha kissed her on the hair.
pitied. She has no one, no one. To tell the truth, I don’t need her,

herself in difficulties owing to the boorishness of these people”—he
door of the adjoining hut as if expecting something unpleasant to emerge
“To the left!... Keep to the right!” the men shouted to him.

were written on the twentieth, and during all this time not only has
CHAPTER XIX
revolution, which has become more terrible than ever in the person of

smile.
at which she had been listening.
away.
position as soldiers, Pierre once more thought of the wounded men at
men. Disregarding Napoleon they rushed after the plunder and Napoleon
or take away a single grain, and that’s all about it!” cried another.

“Well, it seems to be getting quieter,” remarked Ferapóntov, finishing
And he looked on this visit to a churlish old man and a rich and ugly
“Of course. What is it?”

“How sweet!” said Countess Mary, looking at and playing with the baby.

the smoke which the wind carries away.
except the one he knew of—that Prince Andrew’s marriage threatened
running to the door and the noise of a chair falling over, and a girl
mistakes, he is drawn into a conspiracy that aims at seizing power and

given it up.”
were quietly dropping melted wax into snow and looking at the shadows
would be an insult to her and to her father’s memory. Assuming that she

retreat during the finest period of summer and with sufficient supplies
mine when I married and was so deep in debt that I was threatened with
“Spring, love, happiness!” this oak seemed to say. “Are you not
marriage but the pleasure married people get from one another, that is,
audible, broken whisper, and began kissing his hand more rapidly, just
on—that Pierre became quite bewildered and only replied:
tormented by the consciousness of his own weakness. The few glasses of



Natásha whom she had liked so little at their meeting in Moscow long
sister with the mole.
trunks to the storerooms. When they understood that order the servants
accompanied them on foot as far as the bridge that could not be crossed,
“No, that can’t be!”
laws of statistics, geography, political economy, comparative philology,

CHAPTER XX
“No, I won’t promise that. You don’t know how Kutúzov is pestered
greatness, and again—as a horse walking a treadmill thinks it is doing
all the pages there were excellent drawings. And in my dream I knew
the crowd moaned and heaved forward, but again paused.


lower floor.


“you and your generals won’t get on against Buonaparte; you’ll
with my hussars fwom here. And at the signal shot...”
The remains of Langeron’s and Dokhtúrov’s mingled forces were
the evening, heaven knows what might not have happened. But tomorrow we

Nesvítski. “They’ve made up splendid packs for me—fit to cross
houses off.
killed two birds with one stone: to appease the mob I gave them a victim



And you may argue about that as you like!”
the battery. (This was the attack for which Ermólov claimed the credit,
heard.”

crossed themselves.... “Forward, with God’s aid!”
saw the cupolas and crosses of the New Convent of the Virgin still dark
buildings—schools, hospitals, and asylums—on all the estates
tea and evidently needed a pretext for being angry after her meal. “What
set to work I shall do it as no one else could, but now I can jest, and
themselves, stifle this remorse and grow callous, as a result of being
everyone.
“Something very important is happening between them,” thought
officer’s command took the two convicts who stood first in the row. The
of some dislocation and blunder spread through the ranks. How such
the little princess. She felt, as courtiers do when the Tsar enters, the

Joseph Alexéevich was not in Petersburg—he had of late stood aside
Bolkónski.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
heard?”

he was quite well and unwounded. Many various, indifferent, and

Napoleon, standing on the knoll, looked through a field glass, and in
The first shots had not yet ceased to reverberate before others rang out
as he held the candle, and the face of another man who was still asleep.

accepted Pierre’s taking up his residence in the house without surprise,
theory by a huge experiment and proving its soundness to the whole world
“Why didn’t you mention it, Prince? I would have offered you
that I was ungrateful, and that Mamma would never allow him to marry
had evidently run out of that room to give vent to the sobs that were
Napoleon raised his voice.

it. Telyánin took the purse and began carelessly slipping it into the
agreed with him, though he understood Prince Andrew’s thoughts somewhat
private and intimate life of the house continued.
steward there, who, bowing respectfully, looked into his face and at
“I knew you’d give permission... so I’ll tell them,” and, having kissed
history, in which it has not a free but a predestined significance.
Everyone in the house realized for whose sake Prince Andrew came, and
a despot. Who is right and who is wrong? No one! But if you are
    CHAPTER XVI
the count went with the prospective purchaser to his estate near Moscow.
their grief in their own way. The old prince would not cherish any hope:
army was. One of the Russians understood what was asked and several

cousinage est un dangereux voisinage. * Don’t you think so?”
says, ‘go up to ours and they are all rotten and maggoty. So,’ he says,
lay down on his bed groaning and loudly exclaimed, ‘My God!’ Why didn’t
smile.
“Karatáev!” came to Pierre’s mind.
her childlike face.
can’t be done.”
continue their flight? Despite his desperate shouts that used to seem
“Yes, she’s fast enough,” replied Nicholas, and thought: “If
What is wanted is not some Barclay or other, but a man like Bennigsen,
no time. I hope, my dear friend, you will carry out your father’s
who was passing:

sense of joy or relief, he gazed at what was taking place. The fifth man
go near him. When he did so and heard the subdued moaning with which
“You know, chère Marie,” said Mademoiselle Bourienne, “that we are in
it. Fighting again... A woman with a baby, and not bad-looking either!
Borís looked at his general inquiringly and immediately saw that he was
and went to the window, involuntarily inhaling the freshness of the
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree
they afraid of sinning?...” said the same mob now, looking with pained

Pierre.
proclamation which he had dictated straight off without corrections. It
a single armed enemy remains in my country!” It seemed to Borís that it
right, it is advantageous to attack the enemy’s latter wing especially
relations with Nicholas in Vorónezh she was shy about doing so. Making
they might be laughing at his way of life) he himself joined in the
in the army, besides the subordination and discipline prescribed in the
and so forth. They had heard all that before. And all he said—that it

war on Austria a Russian corps crossed the frontier to co-operate with
conditions, and to show that all limitations, conflicts, and even

has lived through.

bank, hesitating to step onto the ice. The general on horseback at the
tomowwow,” muttered Denísov.



The foremost Frenchman, the one with the hooked nose, was already so
elders.
another, like bubbles rising in water.
knew everything, could do anything, and was known to all Moscow—that

Having baited the horses twice on the way, he arrived at the town toward
pertinaciously while he shook Pierre by the shoulder without looking at
Another hussar also rushed toward the horse, but Bondarénko had already
From that time, during all the rest of the Rostóvs’ journey, at every
his horse which would not stand still, then he rode out of the yard at a

were those of the orderlies who were packing up; one voice, probably a
“I am thinking of what you have told me,” answered Princess Mary.


in Countess Bezúkhova’s presence. To be received in the Countess
felt so glad to be free from his own lawlessness and to submit his will
whiteness, and pleasant smiles.
Prince Andrew rose hastily, listened to the business they had come

minutes to eight, please. We shall make up a rubber. Our general is
had come personally to point out to the princess the necessity for her
knew what she ought to have said to Natásha, but she had been unable
“Form column! Prepare to charge!”

“I have heard of such cases and know that His Majesty is very severe
general, in Russian, speaking with the French intonation he affected
“How she blushes, how she blushes, my pretty!” said Hélène. “You
Karatáev’s advice he tied with string round the ankles for warmth, and
Anatole stopped him.
his confusion, instantly continued in the same pleasant tones:
“Very good?” said Natásha reproachfully, noticing her brother’s
spectacles in her presence, fumbling near them and not seeing them, or

glance at the esaul and Denísov one saw that the latter was wet and
the movement of the locomotive by the smoke that is carried back has
silence.

“But military men have told me that it is impossible to fight in the


surprise, and noticing the glance he turned on Natásha as he rose.
screams, squeals, and waving of whips that caused even the shaft horses
conversation began Prince Andrew was struck by the fact that the Emperor
the service and patriotically Russian. He resented Shinshín’s remark.

watch and its hands point to ten, I hear the bells of the neighboring
stood beside her, kissing her hair.
Emperor joined the army to encourage it to defend every inch of Russian
nothing, but here on the one hand the local nobility have done me the
Freemasonry presented itself to him.

that was strange.

where the clavichord stood.
nothing but meanness, deceit, envy, intrigue, and ingratitude—the
not only without interest but even as if ashamed of what Pierre was
tooth or hair remained.
holding in her hands the old ball dress (already out of fashion) which
aid of his servant, and not looking at Pierre. With a pair of felt boots

God!” And without noticing that he was singing, to strengthen the si
permission here in hospital, that I may not have to play the part of a
had on the Spásski Hill which might have been serious for her in her
Marching thirty miles that stormy night across roadless hills, with his
Moscow.

CHAPTER II
In November, 1805, Prince Vasíli had to go on a tour of inspection

back to the house.
preoccupation with state affairs, himself visited the theaters that were
I am sorry for that,” he went on.
across the bodies and under a terrible fire from the French, he attended
relation to the external world and the greater or lesser clearness
his fieldglass. A little behind them Nesvítski, who had been sent to
his grave, even rather gloomy, look was instantaneously replaced by
and moved to the right; from behind it, dispersing the laggards, came
kept them for some weeks while the old man was recovering. One of his
would again have risen had not the prince still held her fast, “though
Some of the soldiers were frightened and ran away, others went on
All the advantages were on our side. Our enormous forces, undoubtedly
true! Write an answer!”
“In a minute, in a minute,” he said, dipping his pen.
him with greedy expectation. “I can always arrange so as not to see
remained constantly at her mother’s side, sleeping on a lounge chair
wished to see the regiment just in the state in which it had been on
always well disposed toward him, and Kutúzov suggested that he should
or weeping over its downfall. The tales and descriptions of that time
Pétya ran up and offered her his back. She jumped on it, putting her
else, but it took too long to dissolve, so it was decided that Mary

master and yet regretful of her cloak.
refrained long from bursting into a peal of ringing laughter even before
to cut off showed itself particularly whenever the Russians stumbled on
the yard and in the house. The count had been out since morning. The
whether all or only half the things were left behind. Cases full of
him than that of all the rest of the world. As he spoke now he was
and kinds of dessert, in order to send a full description of the dinner

sleeping castle. The same old stateliness, the same cleanliness, the
Two months had elapsed since the news of the battle of Austerlitz and
Emperor.
of her sons under her wing, and she hoped to arrange matters for her
both shone with satisfaction and a confession that besides sorrow life
interview with Kutúzov he went back to his regiment reassured as to
B., and only remembered that I ought not to have done so when everybody

to hers. A woman came from the bedroom with a frightened face and became
three months ago, draw fresh moral strength from your look, so gentle,
Prince Vasíli and Anatole had separate rooms assigned to them.
feet. Where is Alexander now, and of what is he thinking? A strange,
“Lord Jesus Christ, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord Jesus
the Bedchamber. The diplomatic career now lies open before you.”

so far from home that he accepted “Uncle’s” offer that the hunting
these actions.
her sleeves and puffing heavily.
not know Him, but He is here, He is in me, He is in my words, He is in


a German tutor for Prince Nicholas. Then if your love or passion or
Claparède and sending Friant now, the order was carried out exactly.
or reaping to have tea with her. She did not understand why he spoke
matters, social interests and the fair sex occupied no small part of his
Andrew did not tell his father that he would no doubt live a long time
knew... it’s the devil knows what!”
they did not accord with the theory, and therefore could not serve as
of frost, when there were only seven or eight hours of daylight and
home Natásha placed herself in the position of a slave to her husband,
in their accustomed places: Nicholas beside the stove at a small table
began to devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Mary should be

only now found full satisfaction for it. Moreover, at this moment Pierre
“And then of course my family has also to be considered,” Prince

to say more in the presence of a stranger.
been made earlier and that a battle should have been fought two days


indicated that if he was not dancing it was because he would not and not
and bright. That day I received a letter from my benefactor in which he
carriages, and carpets from the Polish proprietors. Rostóv remembered

“Where have you been? To Kiev?” Prince Andrew asked the old woman.

A space like a street was left between each two lines of troops. The
my advance guard, and have no right to arrange an armistice without my
    CHAPTER XX
was not a Frenchman, the captain, evidently not understanding how anyone
days was still thin—moved. His gleaming eyes were fixed intently on
quartermaster of the regiment and his commander had ordered him to
wishing to show him that she did not even dare expect to interest him,
and resentment the Emperor had found a phrase that pleased him, fully
held out his cheek.
Berg blushed and smiled.
our good.


Rostóv glanced angrily at Ilyín and without replying strode off with



are clever, you are well educated. And what have you done with all these
“But you see what he writes...” said another, pointing to a printed
everyone else who opposed his theory. But besides this feeling of
think about what is pleasant. In solitude a man generally listens to
fellows on the staff who get rewards without doing anything!”
to the Russians, as soon as that change occurred the need of attacking

visible as if but a stone’s throw away, and the movements of the
BOOK THIRTEEN: 1812
The lieutenant never looked the man he was speaking to straight in the
In general at Bald Hills the little princess lived in constant fear, and
1805, 1807, and 1809—precede the great westward movement; there is the
Afterwards in the evening when I gave him his ticket, he again began
study.”
Prince Andrew followed Speránski’s every word and movement with
the undefinable essence of the forces of heat and electricity, or

was the Emperors’ suites. The Emperors rode up to the flank, and the
“Tell me, my dear,” said she to Natásha, “is Mimi a relation of
now.”
Andrew had gone and made the sign of the cross in his direction. From

“I have no money with me,” he said.
of doubt showed itself on his face as he spoke.

Borís received no clear explanation of why it had been necessary for
sitting.
dinner all who came “to congratulate.” The countess wished to have
He was met by Gabriel, Márya Dmítrievna’s gigantic footman.

friends and associations, besides the comforts of life of which he had
subsequently termed “that gosling I have made an eagle”).

ill and did not leave his study.
large, gentle brown eyes were also round.

honor? Knowing him to be an only son, to challenge him and shoot so
talk, and especially a quick glance Sónya gave her.

The French had attacked the battery and, seeing Kutúzov, were firing
jolted over the stony road. Some of them were talking (he heard Russian

everything. I often wonder at you, Annette—how at your age you

a vague consciousness that she was not Bonaparte’s servant, was really,

it really happened, it would have been necessary to make an effort of

of, eh?”
Kutúzov accompanied by his adjutants rode at a walking pace behind the
Guards?” asked Napoleon.
“I should think so!” replied Natásha’s laughing eyes.
“Well, they say,” continued the adjutant with the same smile, “that
confirmed the order to give up all the carts to the wounded and take the
be heads of the departments when everybody has to pass examinations?”

the duty that now bound him to her forever. The present feeling, though

less a prey to evil and death?—death which ends all and must come
you and make you weep.
tranquil as I am now.”
wrenching herself from Márya Dmítrievna’s hands with a vicious effort
himself, his faith in the right ordering of the universe, in humanity,
you won’t ask!”
“If it’s inconvenient, please don’t,” said Berg. “Only I so wanted it,
“Pe... Pétya... Go, go, she... is calling...” and weeping like a child
soldiers had biscuits dealt out to them freely, and they even shared
countess and Sónya, and a fourth held the whole of the gossamer garment


like these if one has any feeling?” said Anna Pávlovna. “You are
of Alexander’s sisters was spoken of. But besides considerations of

and Minnesingers, but the history of the life of the peoples and their
everything, only I have nothing....”
     him for not keeping his word to me.”
you ravish quite...” The Emperor passed on to the drawing room, the

The Emperor knit his brows with dissatisfaction and, glancing back,

Behind them along the narrow, sodden, cutup forest road came hussars in
my dear fellow, I’ll give you twenty thousand and a note of hand for

“It is done!” she said to the count, pointing triumphantly to the


eagerly to work at the new task of placing the wounded in the carts. The
mention it, Monsieur Kiril. The other day if it had not been for you
does not even attempt to hide its artificiality) of a man who is
“Because there is a God, that God without whose will not one hair falls

a boston player who had always been well disposed toward him, Stepán
high, but the last round fell in the midst of a group of hussars and
smiled at me yesterday and asked me to come again, and I love her, and
But Natásha, knowing all her husband’s ways and ideas, saw that he had
reproached them for doing so; now expelled all the French residents from
and social topics were ended and the time had come for intimate
ribbons.
and butterflies knock awkwardly against the walls of the hive in their
Dunyásha had left the room had already passed into yet another happier
taken for the army or have died—this is such a year! It’s not a case of
But all that evening and next day reports came in one after another
“Yes, your excellency,” answered Daniel, quickly doffing his cap.
coats.
sitting in a conspicuous place and talking to him like a grown-up lady.
of him.
occurred to none of them that it was three o’clock and time to go to
“It is true that Natásha is still young, but—so long as that?...”
but she did not even see the Emperor, and only noticed that he had gone
“I am very glad to make your acquaintance. I had heard of you, as
wagons. He halted irresolutely, not knowing whether to return or go on.


woman! Where has she run off to? And how am I to find the nearest way
detachment no one knew anything of the general position of affairs. They
“I saw the Pávlograd hussars attack there, your excellency,” chimed
officer as in a looking glass—started, moved forward, and answered:
inner laboratory of his mind in a portable form as if intentionally, so
In the midst of the third écossaise there was a clatter of chairs being
With each fresh blow less and less chance of life remained for those not

loved no one but Prince Andrew and had never ceased to love him. She
“How’s it you’re not drunk today?” said Nesvítski when the
history has invented.
illness of the old Georgian princess, of Métivier’s disappearance from
Daniel.
of bareheaded officers, soldiers, and militiamen surrounded the icon.
trying to imagine Karatáev’s opinion on the subject. “He would not have
In truth everything presented itself in a dark and gloomy light to
brushed head. He looked at the Rostóvs from under his brows and said
“The limits of human life ... are fixed and may not be

Without going home, Pierre took a cab and drove to see the Moscow

The sight of them reminded him of all he had experienced and learned
And lastly, the final departure of the great Emperor from his heroic
both voices began speaking at the same time, the door was flung open,


I’m alive, that is not my fault, so I must live out my life as best I
legs that were already spreading apart. Then they dressed him in uniform
The prince looked at his daughter’s frightened face and snorted.

thanked him, and said he would report his gallant deed to the Emperor
I should like to tell everything to Pierre. He is kind and generous. It
smile,” says Thiers. After riding a few paces in silence, Napoleon
“Sell us that horse!” Denísov called out to the Cossacks.
and one leg bent under him. Pierre ran up to the post. No one hindered
“Ah! Breathing again, breathing!” he muttered to himself.
woods, there burst from the muskets small cloudlets that had no time
and looking carelessly about him.
submissive attitude, his fingers clasped before him. His emaciated young
ago have joined the archduke. And believe me on my honour that to me
complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C
her nephew’s education. She was sad. Now, after a month passed in quiet
Anatole had asked her to bring him and Natásha together, and she was
“I have had a proposition made me concerning you,” he said with an
the natural sciences: leaving aside the question of cause, they seek for


joyfully, his eyes moist with tears, at this bright comet which, having
her. No, not that, I don’t, I can’t...”
“I did not... What is it all about?” inquired Prince Andrew
“Nothing, nothing.” She smiled at Pierre through her tears. “Good night!
for the attainment of that purpose.
them, he rejoiced as though seeing all this for the first time. What for
the boy he got up quickly, took out his handkerchief, and went to the
“Hm... Hm...” muttered the old prince to himself, finishing what he
    CHAPTER XXI
(Natásha knew all about such things as festering) and the doctor had



The captain looked at Pierre. He had a habit of stopping short in the
All Moscow repeated Prince Dolgorúkov’s saying: “If you go on
proceeded to his study.
glittering like stars in the sunlight.
enlightenment?”
luxurious life of Petersburg, concerned only about phantoms and
That same day a council of war had been held in which all the members of
excellent dinners for the officers at every halting place. The regiments
of Paul I of Russia who recognizes his government; chance contrives
at the Razumóvski’s ball ... and Countess Apráksina ... I was
question him. The man announced that the Tsar had been driven in a

through the clear morning air penetrating streaks of rosy, golden-tinted
“But the worst of it, gentlemen—I am giving Kurágin away to
still merrier, and some of them could not refrain from laughter, for


they could be seen running back past it carrying their wounded on
running away, and looked at the messenger. Bolkhovítinov was bespattered
“You should take some rest, your Serene Highness,” replied Schneider.
Rostóv looked at him, trying to remember where he had seen him before.
distance than they had already traversed, before they reached the

The whole household, as if to atone for not having done it sooner, set
the Grand Cross of Maria Theresa, and the whole army received rewards.
princess’ order.

sergeant of Poniatowski’s corps, who explained in Polish that he had
with him, tell him about his past, his life at home, and his love,
seen.
“look at Papa!” though as it was they never took their eyes off the
addressing Pierre rapidly between her sobs. “The fire broke out
asked to give up all he possessed.
Arakchéev, uttering only the first words amiably and then—again

but Frise had, and Múdrov had diagnosed them even better? What would the
“Sónya,” she suddenly exclaimed, as if she had guessed the true
Frowning with vexation at the effort necessary to divest himself of his
hubs of the wheels, and the infantry sank ankle-deep in that soft,
Having similarly explained his views and his magnanimity to Tutólmin, he
wounded Bolkónski, and the doctor had to admit that he had not expected
me apologize, because if he, as commander of this regiment, thinks it
he was thrown amid those big, dreadful, cruel men who were fighting

Natásha.
and could not imagine.
feel,” thought he, “if she saw me here now on this field with the
the tall lad were drinking in the dramshop that morning, had brought the

could not possibly be, and so did not deliver the order.
they halted in silence. There was nothing fresh to be seen from the
of the Legion of Honor and Napoleon the Order of St. Andrew of the
been so pleased at Olmütz and according to which an ensign might rank

“Yes, I had forgotten... I really must go home... business...” said
unchanging smile.
men’s moral responsibilities from their path.
this misery, and money, and Dólokhov, and anger, and honor—it’s all
Natásha, whose lead he always followed, was in high spirits. Natásha was
him.
Mère to be inscribed on the charitable institutions, thereby combining
wine for her son, or money to buy a present as a surprise for Natásha or
and that the richest peasants (who formed the deputation) had begun
described it, she felt something like a fresh breeze wafted into her
“What does that prove?” he was saying as Rostóv rode up. “They
he had met that evening.
life, which seemed to him so beautiful now that he had today learned to
the army and return home. On receiving this letter, Nicholas did not

Your Majesty has considered yourself to be in a state of war with me
toes toward the general. The captain’s face showed the uneasiness of
“Well, Prince, may God give you great luck!” said Matrëna in her gypsy
Nine days after the abandonment of Moscow, a messenger from Kutúzov
discipline. Ostermann’s flattering words and promise of a reward should
him to this condition.
they were in the carriage. “He hardly recognizes anybody.”

hat and green tail coat.
Bonaparte. He alone of all the Russians has disgraced the Russian name,

necessity of physical rest.

laugh. And they, too, passed on, so that Nesvítski did not learn who
In Kiev Pierre found some people he knew, and strangers hastened to make
without being dull or angry, was silent, thoughtful, and preoccupied.
staff,” replied Prince Andrew with a smile which Kutúzov noticed.
things possible which the commanders of the big detachments did not dare
I shall be in a more prominent position,” continued Berg, “and

merry.
service, related to people in the service. It seemed that in this
a movement among the peasants to emigrate to some unknown “warm rivers.”
in to the Minister of War. Five minutes later he returned and bowing
anew—but that he must live out his life, content to do no harm, and

“Altogether such heroism as was displayed by the Russian warriors
Rostóv shrugged his shoulders as much as to say: “Nor do I, but

that he too seemed ashamed of the hussar of the line.
“I have.”
started,” thought Prince Andrew, watching his old acquaintance with
explained by the activity of Louis XIV, XV, and XVI, their mistresses
that he could scarcely breathe, and everybody shouted, “Hurrah! hurrah!

strange though very familiar phenomenon.
Denísov. “They keep dwagging the wegiment to and fwo all day. If they
“She is a very admirable and excellent young woman,” said she, “and you
now, the whole difference of opinion is based on the recognition or
March, April, May. Speak, Mamma, why don’t you say anything? Speak!”
syllable, “and if you like I can put you in touch with him.” He
nephew’s lessons, she was informed that Rostóv had called. With a firm
would be particularly pleasant to him to dishonor my name and ridicule


After a few words about Princess Mary and her late father, whom
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
concealed the fact under a show of irritation and contempt, he was
Rostóv, smoking his pipe and turning his head about as the water
at the doors, but after all he did at last enter first. He walked shyly
Exploding at the word intriguer, Nicholas, raising his voice, told
The right thing now was, if not to retire from the service, at any rate
and the corners of the white house in the distance, all stood out in the
government officials to his table, had unexpectedly selected Michael
boat, and Rostopchín had said to them in French: “Rentrez en vous-mêmes;
myself and ruined my life. And only now when I am living, or at least
nothing but them.
If men descended from the apes at an unknown period of time, that is
the Emperor for having moved his army along the Ryazán road, and the

And this was not the result of logical reasoning but was a direct and
the village, and over the fields the larks rose trilling, one after
is harmed, and your teeth are set on edge. Like an experienced sportsman
herself have been ashamed of so wild a cry and everyone else would have

“No, it’s not that, but worse. You will see. O, Mary, he is too good, he
horse of a batman or groom of some important personage and began to
“And this man too,” thought Pierre, looking into the face of the Chief
satisfied....”
Bourienne flushed, and gave the princess a frightened look.
landowner, fourteen miles away, who had the stud. Everything seemed to

exhausted and hungry, went forward led by their officers. Others held
foot through the town.
embraced the one true faith, and asking him to carry out all the
conditions, and that certain relations of population to soil produce
“O, Lord Jesus Christ!” she murmured.
who had wished to stop the affair ran to a corner of the room and threw
perplexity. “To give or not to give?” he had asked himself. “I have
Rostóv did not listen to the soldier. He looked at the snowflakes
on his bed, ran all disheveled out of the mud hut to embrace him,

liked to tell him. He gathered up the papers and with a bow to both,
the evening again turned to Borís, asking him in a tone of caressing

the panting old general.
“Yes, sir, and there’s a light in your father’s study.”
    CHAPTER XXX
the French had offered to move him from the men’s to the officers’ shed,



metallic sound of the bells reverberated high above and the hot rays of
what a strange frenzy one experiences during an attack,” Prince
be seen.
examination of the accounts with Mítenka did not last long. The village
fundamental convictions your own, join our brotherhood, give yourself up
The country seat at Bald Hills had been rebuilt, though not on the same
Pierre, was only busy causing him annoyance.
In half an hour all was again in order, only the squares had become gray
stomach with an already stiffened arm flung wide.
There Platón Karatáev was sitting covered up—head and all—with his
and distinguished from everyone else in the world. Napoleon merely laid
at it, and stamped his foot twice on the floor as a signal. The door

labor is as essential to him, as much a condition of his existence, as
Prince Andrew gazed with anxious curiosity at that impassive face
own monarch), looked round at the Emperor Alexander to imply that what
During the whole time of his convalescence in Orël Pierre had

details of his disaster he understood that half the campaign was lost,
Old Bolkónski had always had a poor opinion of Prince Vasíli’s

Anatole, for whom Pierre was looking, dined that day with Dólokhov,
own family. So thought the major-domo on his master’s behalf.
his words which would explain his feeling for her.
a dream in which a man fancies that a ruffian is coming to attack him,

“Is that their Tsar himself? He’s not bad!” low voices could be heard
“Yes, yes, thank God! Well, and what news from the army?”
opening, but forgets that at each stage of the game there were similar
handsome and a terrible scapegrace. That is all I have been able to find
this magnanimity Bonaparte subsequently repaid by death.


suddenly came to and, lifting his head with an effort, took Rostóv, who
inheritance; but I do know that since this young man, whom we all used
speech was full of dignity and greatness as Napoleon understood it.
of herself, while her face beamed with ecstatic happiness. Her slender
disheveled head from the hot pillow.

At first while they were still moving along the Kalúga road, Napoleon’s
whole outlook on the universe is constructed—the incomprehensible


“Why, it’s a mercy if we can get the carpets alone into three cases,”

their turn, and the procession of carriages moved up the street. In the

company commanders calculated and reckoned, and by morning the
“I say, is it true that we have been beaten?” “And what did you think?


great men,” says history. And, indeed, human reason replies: every time
He was sent for trial and condemned to hard labor, I believe. Now the


and scarves strewn all about her, gazing fixedly at the floor and
seen, as the military scientists might convince themselves by the
obey,” answered the quartermaster.
and with a deep bow would ask them to help him. The gentlemen always
Rostóv considered, and then went in the direction where they said he
Among the innumerable categories applicable to the phenomena of human
present. “‘What pleasure is there to be’ is not Russian!”
Thirty-second Military Division, of Bremen, of Hamburg, and so on: it
not abandon the edifice of argument he had laboriously constructed.
“What? Saw the real Mack? With hands and feet?”

Having ridden round the whole line from right flank to left, Prince
he wore the air of a man little concerned in what the two ladies were
have been summoned here not to discuss whether it’s best for the empire

and he turned inquiringly to Balashëv, and evidently this thought turned
from excitement, asked the aide-de-camp whether he would be permitted
them all for a drive in his troyka, proposed to take with them about a

and frowning, now suddenly shrugging his shoulders and wincing, and now
answered.”

last medicine has done her a very great deal of good. She has freshened
no more. The old count cried because he felt that before long, he, too,
Dunyásha’s words about Peter Ilýnich and a misfortune, but did not grasp
farther. Sérpukhov is already occupied by an enemy detachment and Túla
Mary. The countess did not sleep at night, or when she did fall asleep
evening and under the influence of wine—followed all that was told him,
midnight the voices began to subside, a cock crowed, the full moon began
But when Katie brought the required dress, Princess Mary remained

BOOK ELEVEN: 1812
wet, swayed in the wind and flung down bright drops of water to one
dear fellow!” and for some unknown reason tears suddenly filled his
While waiting for the young man to take his place on the step Rostopchín
others insisted that as the French had gathered things from different
army really began to improve from the time of that march, it does not at
“No, friend, he is sharper-eyed than you are. Boots and leg bands...
“Yes, we are soldiers of the Ápsheron regiment. I was dying of fever. We
historians’ language.
cannot be bound by what a false religion laid upon me.”
and besides this, nine men in every thousand for the militia. Everywhere
more wily than any of them and that it would not be a bad thing if he
was not behaving very well in this matter. “Youth, frivolity... well,


rain and gazed anxiously before him. His thin face with its short, thick
contrary alike to strategic and diplomatic considerations, ordered an
a problem that has already been proved. Wolzogen took his place and
rose, walked to and fro, put on a warm overcoat and a hat, and went
he thought, stopping for a moment with a sinking heart, and then
aim was to show General Weyrother—who had read his dispositions with
But Borís noticed that he was preparing to make fun of Berg, and
Moscow and Petersburg, came to see him. Berg arrived in an immaculate
and that evening thanks to her agitation she was particularly pretty.
Moscow without a battle,” though Moscow was then already abandoned. When
Borís, or between you two? It’s all nonsense!”
the point of view of the old countess and of society it was out of the

view of the impending difficulties. It was not a council of war, but,
that the French were only some twenty-five miles away, that French
“I should like to see the great man,” he said, alluding to Napoleon,
Pierre, with downcast eyes, drank out of his glass without looking at

“our men have been wasting time.”
The question that had perturbed Pierre on the Mozháysk hill and all

night with us at Otrádnoe.”

false) had been received during the night of a movement by the French to
    * Though a foreigner, Russian in heart and soul.
accent.
and immeasurable meanness.
has brought us to! Barbara Ivánovna told me the mob near killed her
That evening Nicholas did not go out, but stayed at home to settle some
hussars, Cossacks, and adjutants, in his camlet coat, as he jolted on
Petersburg during those last four months as if it were something new. He
before. Having taken a kerchief from the cupboard, Willarski bound
giving her instructions how to get to her Aunt Malvíntseva at Vorónezh.
with strained smartness. They gave little jumps as they walked, as
society by his agility. His particularly free manner of dancing even
Writing the words L’Empereur Napoléon in numbers, it appears that the

death that overhung them, they dared not look life in the face. They
of the French came from all sides, and in one village, ten miles from

his speech, which he used in extreme cases when special persuasion was
ordered dinners and suppers and obviously tried to appear cheerful, but
relish Zdrzhinski’s conversation. “My stockings and shirt... and the
progression; and that crossing of the Berëzina about which so much has
replies of a man who, watching the movements of a herd of cattle and
appeared.
voice. To fresh questions as to the firmness of his resolution Pierre

to describe the same event, the replies they give immediately lose all
happiness, that happiness is within him, in the satisfaction of simple
and behind the outposts and told him that his wish to be presented to
The stormcloud had come upon them, and in every face the fire which
to be in both the Russian capitals by the autumn, and the talk of the
benefactors. Self-sacrifice was her most cherished idea but in this case
over their heads, unstrapping their overcoats and drawing the sleeves on
him, and he looked at the fallow field, the bushes, and the sky, and
knew might interest the old lady and that she could understand. He

The little princess lay supported by pillows, with a white cap on her
at the entrance.
sang the air of the chorus so that Sónya should catch it. “Where were


no external aims—only a need to exercise her various functions and
success and at the inability of others to understand these things.
Russian bath. The movement of these wrinkles formed the principal play
sleek cavalry passed, before a carriage drawn by six gray horses rattled
on her friend.

an absence of cause. However inaccessible to us may be the cause of the
“Oh, he loves me so!” said Hélène, who for some reason imagined that

about the army and the battle, and then the talk went off into merry
prince.
indifference, and benevolence toward all, which cannot be acquired
prisoners, and Junot’s baggage train—still constituted a separate and
Princess Mary knelt down before her and hid her face in the folds of her
now his plump hairy chest to the brush with which his valet was rubbing
who instead of getting into the general fold every evening goes into a
if she were blossoming under the praise of this dear Countess Bezúkhova
anything wrong in my behavior. But I’ll just tell Mamma how you are
with Count Rostóv, the general, and the colonel. At the card table he
of fear for his young and happy life, possessed his whole being. Rapidly
“Oh yes, I understand,” said the governor’s wife.

middle of which soldiers were watering their lean horses at the pump

and so everything displeased her. She did not like Princess Mary, whom

Pierre sighed, rose submissively, emptied his glass, and, waiting till
intercourse with young women.
a lid, and a gold snuffbox with the count’s portrait on the lid which
spy, slave of Buonaparte, spy, get out of my house! Be off, I tell
taken him away!”
and a particularly happy light in his eyes, “you see, brother...”
means being Napoleon’s guest. Not only did I never see him but I heard
merchants, one of whom Pierre knew, a fat otkupshchík. The other was

for permission to serve in the army.
nothing resembled reality. The big dark blotch might really be the
protecting a woman,” and that “to protect a woman who was being insulted
were talking and listening too eagerly and too naturally, which was why

alive! We have a house of our own in Moscow, but it’s a long way from
She even turned so that he should see her profile in what she thought






him from all parts of Moscow. Those about him had never seen the count
once was heard on the stairs. Forgetting the danger of being recognized,
Moscow, and news of the surrender of Moscow to the French spread through

the retreat of the frightened Bonaparte.
“You can see the woman in her already,” she said in French, pointing to

    CHAPTER XIV
The day after the council at Málo-Yaroslávets Napoleon rode out early in
an air of importance that showed that she felt she quite knew what she
hope of recovery. It was impossible for him to travel, it would not do
given away for nothing.

Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latest fashion
fixed on two saddles and covered with a horsecloth, a small samovar was

know for certain how much Véra would have and did not receive at least
what’s one to do?” and, having given his order, he returned to
men to flush.
authorities. ‘I have taken six lives,’ he says (he was a great sinner),

By adopting smaller and smaller elements of motion we only approach a
brothels,” and with these words Márya Dmítrievna, turning up her wide
feeling the hand of God upon him, suddenly recognizes the insignificance
gate?” thought he. Just then Mávra Kuzmínichna appeared from behind
bitterly that in spite of repeated orders, the soldiers continue to
“Oh, don’t speak of his going, don’t! I won’t hear it spoken
Evidently the explanations furnished by these historians being mutually
with the old prince.”
proper.

does not even interest them, for it does not come within the range of
conception of some one man who saved Russia and destroyed Napoleon. In
Weyrother’s had already been approved. As soon as Prince Andrew began

Having ordered punch and summoned de Beausset, he began to talk to him
killed.” Rook tried to rise on his forelegs but fell back, pinning his
“They even tell me wonders I myself never dreamed of! Mary Abrámovna
be accepted. He was told that it would not, and without waiting for the
receiving it. This gratitude reminded him of how much more he might do



who seemed to be on his side understood him in their own way with
opposing this is not a power but a violation of power—mere violence.

not go to any large gatherings, but only to small receptions. Prince
printed on ordinary Russian paper) of General Rameau’s, telling people
do.”
The Emperor ceased speaking, the crowd began pressing round him, and

hast thou denied?” he suddenly asked with exulting austerity and
been preparing for it, and with a low bow offered it to Kutúzov.
“I know that man,” he said in a cold, measured tone, evidently


the officials—the heads of the various government departments—knew that
Pierre felt her eyes on him and tried not to look round. The countess
might be some caprice of a sick and half-crazy man, or it might relate

suddenly became unnaturally merry and chattered incessantly to the

“Yes, Dmítri, clean ones, please,” said the countess, sighing
Vorónezh. When Rostóv approached her she was standing settling up for
“Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?” and Natásha’s voice
a Catherine serve to express the life of the nation, which is evident
and not to command armies! Why has he taken on himself such a

officer in the Semënov regiment with whom Borís was to travel to join
dissatisfaction on Borís’ face, and as always happens to those in a

of shoes) and listening to the regular tap of the heel and creak of

“The unpleasant things were said to me,” remarked Véra, “I said
“Made what?”
approached him coming from the copse. Suddenly the wolf’s whole

“It’s plain that they have not all gone yet, Prince,” said
trouvez là le mot pour rire,” * he said, as if strengthening his

When the sun had entirely emerged from the fog, and fields and mist were
her old nurse and the maidservants who came running toward her.
unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.

from whatever point of view—theological, historical, ethical, or
understanding and expressing each other’s thoughts in ways contrary to

stars on his breast. He seemed to have grown thinner since the morning;
In the autumn of 1806 everybody had again begun talking of the war with

Boguchárovo, replied that they had left on the seventh and again went
Next day, the army began its campaign, and up to the very battle of
not so mad as I seemed. On the contrary I was then wiser and had
looking inquiringly at him and watching to see how he would behave
Princess Mary really was disconcerted and red patches came on her face

officer has stolen...”
question of what causes historic events another answer presents itself,
The high-shouldered figure of Zherkóv, familiar to the Pávlograds as
Cossacks did not capture Napoleon then, what saved him was the very
laughing eyes. “These Germans are first-rate fools, don’t you think so,
“‘Grant leave to retire to his country seat to an old man who is

“O-hoy!” came at that moment, that inimitable huntsman’s call
hands still pressed on the seat, glanced at him glumly. Denísov, having
“Not a bit! Please don’t, Aunt!”
people in all walks of life.
regiments and two squadrons of hussars. Denísov, as was his wont, rode
But if you want to ride round the position, come along with us. We are
a chef-d’oeuvre of tactical science which would ensure Napoleon’s
and they were more excited. But Pierre, though he felt that something
aides-de-camp, diplomatic officials, and a large number of foreigners,
his plate round and moving his wineglasses about with as much decision

Straining all her faculties Princess Mary looked at him. The comic

were seen, but columns of smoke rose on all sides, and all Moscow as far
mallets, the doors opened before them. A bass voice (Pierre was still
them in flight or captivity alike.
“I am very, very grateful to you,” she said in French, “but I hope it

yet killed. The regiment stood in columns of battalion, three hundred
and treat her not as a marriageable girl but as a sexless acquaintance.
Denísov. When they prayed for all traveling by land and sea, she
When the eager but misrepeated words had reached their destination in
was about to expand her dresses into a balloon and sit down. They were
“In token of obedience, I ask you to undress.”
    * “Are you the master here?”
He confessed, and received communion: everyone came to take leave of
shouted to him:


the face and figure of Prince Andrew, in a fur cloak the deep collar of

could no longer restrain herself and wept while she gazed at his face.
Napoleon slightly turned his head, and put his plump little hand out
“Well, go on, go on. I am very glad,” said Pierre, and his face
serfs, a first example, of which it is very desirable that there should
bataillons ont toujours raison. *
blind, straight to her, and he goes up to her and falls down and says,
Anna Mikháylovna turned up her eyes, and profound sadness was depicted
Public Baths if I may say so. Ah, when one looks at our young people,
definite idea of her, he turned away and addressed Michael Ivánovich.
expression, evidently habitual to him when conversing with women.
Then a general rode past shouting something angrily, not in Russian.
approached Kutúzov. Of Kutúzov’s suite only four remained. They were
“But, Prince,” said Anna Mikháylovna, “after such a solemn
Kolochá, presents itself as obvious for an army whose object was to
their inevitability would be still greater. The dishonest conduct of the
Russians fought, the only consequence of these actions was a yet more
back!” he almost shouted, putting the child, who began screaming, on the

the truth admitted thousands of years ago by all the religious and
such lengths? He is a deceiver and a villain, that’s plain! What will
twitching, and it was impossible to tell whether he understood what was
old prince to her.

to the ram that was fattened. Even if they do not know for what purpose

same inquisitive, challenging, and rather mocking eyes still looked
“Why are you wandering about like an outcast?” asked her mother.
from what was in her own heart.
seven gifts of the Holy Spirit. Brother O. was very eloquent. In the
CHAPTER XXI
be,” answered the princess joyfully.
Mikháylovna pass and did not evince the least surprise at seeing them
seemed to her that someone was there standing behind the screen in the

At such moments Princess Mary would think how intellectual work dries
glanced at him and turned to Pierre.
As they passed near a church in the Khamóvniki (one of the few unburned
than to act “just anyhow.”

“Yes, I do wish it,” said he.
their surrender, wasted time, and did not do what he was ordered to do.
commander in chief.
expression she did not understand, and lay down again. He was suffering
In quiet and untroubled times it seems to every administrator that it
by a sword.
his having been picked up on the battlefield by the people of the
delay and advised waiting for something else before advancing had been
They received Pierre in their small, new drawing room, where it was

“Don’t, Natásha! What nonsense!” she said, hoping it was a joke.
would magnanimously extend the hand of reconciliation.
and so conforms to the chief condition of motion (absolute continuity)
there are no difficulties in your way.... But Nicholas is my cousin...
that bliss. To love one’s neighbors, to love one’s enemies, to love
To imagine a man perfectly free and not subject to the law of
roll, had supper, and settled down round the fires for the night—some
“No, Princess, I have lost your affection forever!” said
Kutúzov got out of his carriage and sat down on a bench by the roadside.
possess courtly tact, “that his excellency made it an express condition
highest and most diverse Petersburg circles of the day. The reforming
things compared with the heights to which his soul had just been raised.
Emperor, would stubbornly insist on the correctness or falsity of some
far behindhand in many things that had they begun to converse in her
this—want glory, want to be known to men, want to be loved by them, it
“That’s capital; of course she’ll forget her childish promises
our battery it is still bearable,” said the adjutant. “Will you come?”
once she has said...”
“Why’s that fellow in front of the line?” shouted somebody at him again.
not giving Dunyásha time to finish what she was saying, and trying to
killing my children and yours, and Arakchéev from sending me off to some
    CHAPTER XII
this force as a power inherent in heroes and rulers. In their narration
neck. It seemed to Rostóv that Bogdánich was only pretending not
And in proof of the conclusiveness of his opinion all the wrinkles
lines of artillery with green caissons.
journey itself, forgetting its object. But as she approached Yaroslávl
am sure my husband will consent,” said the countess, “but your
of society, they saw everything upside down, and all they did for the
Sónya felt that this was true: that the only possibility of retrieving
à présent la pluie et le beau temps. * He’s too proud for anything.
the window sill, but refrained from touching it. Pierre again covered
“Scoundrel, what are you doing?” shouted the innkeeper, rushing to the
yourselves. It must be here somewhere,” said Lavrúshka.
us aides-de-camp and adjutants! But this is what we’ll do: I have

Rostóv had come to Tilsit the day least suitable for a petition
he was doubly to blame, and he would have preferred to wait; but one of

to obtain a transfer from the militia to the active army. Sónya was in
the customary place before an icon of the Blessed Virgin, let into the
an amusement—almost a pastime,” said Pierre. “For instance, he is

Just then the countess came in from the sitting room with a weary and
herself Anna Makárovna used to knit at the same time on the same
evidently he alone was not seeking anything for himself, nursed no
understood that she was being asked to entertain this young man, and
horse fancier, a sportsman, the possessor of some century-old brandy
Pierre considered.
Pierre laughed.
“justice.” All the complex laws of man centered for her in one clear
Pope himself would hear of her and would send her a certain document.
“Why, nothing,” answered Pierre without raising his eyes or changing the
opportunity of joining in the general current of recollections.

colonel was called Bogdánich) “shuts you up.”
Pierre went up to the fire, ate some roast horseflesh, lay down with his

Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew’s study like
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s

face reappeared in the doorway and behind hers other faces...
effrayée, as he called it, shoes, and silk stockings.


drone population of the army began blowing hard that way, so that it
improvement of the human race by striving for such purification. Which
are no words worthy to do it justice! I tell you, Papa” (he smote
She was the Countess Bezúkhova, Pierre’s wife, and the count, who
say it.”

attained and all their efforts and losses were in vain. But the French
say that the theater of war is Poland and the enemy will never get
Prince Vasíli was not a man who deliberately thought out his plans.
resigning the command of the army. And not only did he love power to

was standing beside the princess, and they were both speaking in excited
and began to speak in a voice in which for the first time new deep
efforts to seem calm.
about discussing it. Besides the ordinary topics of conversation, Pierre
the old man inspired in all his visitors alike a feeling of respectful
Princess. I am at your command.’ Yes, he is a fine fellow and a very

boom!” came the fine, firm, precise sounds in reply. It seemed as if
only hope,” said Pétya.
Rostóv, he stopped short and frowned.
is now rushing along the road to Brünn and will be here in a day or
indicate a wish to get rid of him, and therefore Prince Vasíli’s opinion
In 1808 the Emperor Alexander went to Erfurt for a fresh interview with
“So you are really going to the war, Andrew?” she said sighing.
report was heard, Bagratión looked round and shouted, “Hurrah!”

he had to speak to the Marshal, was driving up the avenue in the grounds

“You see, my dear sir, I have read your project,” interrupted
of a kind then just coming into fashion.

“What! To whom?... Nonsense!” cried the count, suddenly reddening
prince himself) would die before then, and he decided to conform to his

in the absence of opponents, between two councils would simply solicit
quoique étranger, russe de cœur et d’âme, * as he said of himself.

be with you!’” shouted Tíkhon, waving his arms with an angry scowl and
belief is natural and agreeable to traders, agriculturists, and soldiers
Napoleon took a lozenge, put it in his mouth, and glanced at his watch.
still gazed at the spot where Pierre’s face had been before he sat
like that, and Pierre was released. Natásha on one side was talking
morning he became quiet and she fell asleep.
And, having glanced round the room, Prince Andrew turned to Rostóv,
I kill him? My hand trembled. And they have given me a St. George’s
little man with a condescending and good-natured smile. “Les français
him to the nurse, and went with rapid steps toward the door. But at the
party leader. So that the greater part of the events of history—civil
immutability in the enchanted, sleeping castle. But though externally


with fever. “If only reserves had come up just then, lads, there
on snowy-white smooth pillows, evidently freshly changed, Pierre

better during those awful moments—the father who so remembered
said at Tilsit.”
of the prisoners said a word.
Boulogne expedition.
and made a movement of the lips resembling a smile. With hurried hands

a commanding officer’s quarters, the regiment began to move: the
‘Why are you not going to the right place? Go to Kolyázin where a
“As it is, she is Queen, and her word is law!”
again become what she had been at the ball.
impossible...”
and had any effect on the people is another question) had been simply
“There’s nothing for me to understand,” she cried out with
of his return.

are you saying about the government? I don’t understand.”
directing the march rode backward and forward between the carts. Their
pardon. As soon as Rostóv heard them, an enormous load of doubt

fiftieth part of its former inhabitants had remained, but it was empty.

The father and mother did not speak of the matter to their son again,

Pétya, having left his people after their departure from Moscow, joined
The third consideration is the degree to which we apprehend that
contingencies instead of two or three and based nothing on them. The
bad form, but here he felt it incumbent on him to astonish them all by
reply that came into his head. “I like your being businesslike about
“You are very kind,” she said to him.
with Uvárov’s cavalry at midday, and on the other side, beyond Utítsa,

unexpected!”

eldest princess at the door asking whether she might come in.
comply. Anna Pávlovna arranged a group round him, inviting everyone to
“Think? What about?” asked Prince Andrew with surprise.
Mack. An Austrian general complained of me. I congratulated him on
white hands with an air of calm importance.
Bald Hills. Prince Andrew, glancing at Pierre, broke the silence now and
“Don’t you wecollect what bad use I made of your lessons?”
come. Pierre got up and left his new companions, crossing between the
mother. The countess finished her prayers and came to the bed with a
state of Moscow.
covering, and the harp gave out a jarring sound.




CHAPTER XXX

will be coming,” he was going to say, “to dine,” but changed his
back to him in his designation as “the man who does not give his name,”
immediately starting to run along the hall and up the warped steps of

behind him.
“Sergéy Kuzmích—From all sides—” he said, unbuttoning the top
With a slight inclination of her head, Natásha stepped back quickly to
no such reminiscences really exist—just as none existed in this case.

scrutinizing Anatole closely and intently.
then the officers, and after them with excited faces, pressing on one
“What! Are you going to remain as you are, dear princess?” she
considerable pause which made Pierre feel uncomfortable.
attacker should concentrate his forces in order to be stronger than his
fast as the horses could draw it, but for a long time Count Rostopchín

to one and the same threefold end: (1) to brace all his strength for
This relation of the men who command to those they command is what
it was with this that Daniel’s voice was heard calling ulyulyu.
difficulties only because they were apprehensive as to how the matter
again began to laugh. She evidently felt unable to look at him
Pierre and proposed that he should ride with him along the line.
not visible at all. All that struck the eye was a strong, handsome, and
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
criminal,” came into Pierre’s head, “and from their point of

casement. The cold wind flapped the ends of her kerchief and her loose

played “Uncle” once more, running his fingers skillfully over the

to me? I love him alone, him, him, with that face and those eyes, with
the count have borne his dearly loved daughter’s illness had he not
desperately and angrily and tried with her little hands to pull Pierre’s
“But above all,” added Prince Andrew, “I have grown used to my regiment,


clenching his small hand and striking the table with it, “and what
quivering faster than before and his face seemed petrified in its stern
Paul was a market village where a fair was held on St. Peter’s day,
“Natásha, I don’t understand you. And what are you saying! Think of



Natásha liked to test her power over him. He distrusted the order and
when he first loved her. He thought of her pregnancy and felt sorry for

ridicule....
to me that the numbers three and seven are the basis of everything. He
the Emperor an icon of the Venerable Sergius. It was regarded as a model

‘Make me whole,’ says he, ‘and I’ll give thee what the Tsar
many, like himself, had entered that life and that club temporarily,
“Oh, how strange you are with that mustache and those eyebrows!...

consciousness. Inevitability without content is man’s reason in its

uneasily as if preparing to resent any slight that might be put upon the
Telyánin, taking up his cap and moving toward a small empty room. “We
not see herself. She listened to the sounds in the hall. When she saw


Fédya, my dear count; that, believe me, is why I am so fond of you. Few
seized by terror lest he had already, in some way, bound himself to do
How horrified he would have been seven years before, when he first
arrival. From that day, as the doctor expressed it, the wasting fever

followed by their suites. Kutúzov, affecting the manners of an old
let us close the shop....”
will. The races, the English Club, sprees with Denísov, and visits to
kind. He neither saw nor understood anything of the sort. He only saw in
is such men as he who decide the fate of nations,” added Bolkónski
struck Vereshchágin on the head with the blunt side of his saber.

“Ah!” said the Emperor reassured, and with a kindly gleam in his eyes,
Rasgulyáy—the coachman Ipátka knows—and look up the gypsy

one and to invite to dinner only a small number, a list of whom he gave
result, but unthinkable to keep an army even from complete

have two footmen behind her carriage, and very big ones. That was her
in clean notes, was lying ready under a handkerchief on the countess’
forced on me. Even now” (he emphasized the word) “I am ready to receive

Again he looked to the right and saw something running toward him across
blow or the death of Napoleon, but with extraordinary vividness and

“That’s just it,” answered Bilíbin. “Listen! The French entered
“Mummy!... darling!... I am here, my dearest Mummy,” she kept on

with her fingers.
Mítenka, knew of its protective qualities.)

way,” he added in Russian—but pronouncing the word with a French
tone. “Everything seems funny to you, but this isn’t at all a joke....”
confidence, flatter him, become intimate with him, and finally make his
with the same object in view he came to Moscow. There he wavered between
had gone to see his father, could not explain his absence to herself.
go to him himself, and tell him what ought to be done in a tone of
The two young men, the student and the officer, friends from childhood,
encounter one another at the clean, smart hussars who moved past them in
were greater and more resourceful, Nicholas felt himself cornered. This
all felt that this was really a council of war. The conversations all




Napoleon to Madame de Staël, Photius, Schelling, Fichte, Chateaubriand,

When I understood what he wanted—when I saw that he was preparing a bed

was firmly persuaded that he wished for peace and intended to enter into
his presence invited Rostopchín to dinner on St. Nicholas’ Day, and
Prince Andrew knew Denísov from what Natásha had told him of her first
the Emperor’s arrival and the beginning of a new campaign.
word or slight rearrangement kept the conversational machine in steady,
Gulf of Bothnia to the mouths of the Danube. Catherine the Great could
should now be away in a foreign land amid strange surroundings, a manly
the house and along the path that led to the back porch. He knew Sónya
answering unexpectedly gave a sob, being evidently greatly moved.
St. Bartholomew was not due to Charles IX’s will, though he gave the
when they were married, how their husbands would be friends, and how
of life, devoting himself with special activity to building operations


Kutúzov laughed bitterly.
Christianity itself. It taught men to be wise and good and for their
papers and still taking no notice of the special messenger.
Facing him lay a field of winter rye, there his own huntsman stood alone
above all this the lofty sky, formed the chief subjects of his delirious

did not admit anyone. A maid came to the door to say that Alpátych was

Pierre told him about the sick man.
destruction of Moscow and of his property, thrown out of his accustomed
French in the same tone as those that had been addressed to her, and
but not the army staff. Besides these, there were in attendance on the

The result was a compromise which was inevitable: a small detachment was

“How plainly all these young people wear their hearts on their

were there, only disorganized crowds of troops of various kinds. He
Davout raised his head, pushed his spectacles back on his forehead,
hide the traces of their guilt as quickly as possible.
produce a conquest and is not even an invariable indication of conquest;

with a heart full despair he rode away, continually looking back at the
“Dear me!” said his father, who was in a specially good humor. “I

shed followed by an adjutant and the regimental paymaster.
but to go home alone, see his sisters, brother, mother, and father,
had a preliminary talk about the reception of a new Brother. They laid
cher,” he paused, “abstiens-toi” *(2)—he articulated the French proverb


drooping as he broke into a gallop.

“You will answer for it, Captain. It is mutiny—seizing the transport
asked, suddenly changing his former stern expression for a most cordial
For Moscow society Pierre was the nicest, kindest, most intellectual,
little bent, looked with beaming face at the princess without
“Too dear!” Natásha remarked. “How pleased the children will be and
the honor, but I shall never be your son’s wife.”
thousand or a couple of thousand rubles.
“Anatole used to come to borrow money from her and used to kiss her

“Yes, I know him....”
    CHAPTER XIII
of gravity he had previously lacked. Formerly all pecuniary questions,

deeply loved affianced wife—the same Natásha Rostóva who used to be so
As in every large household, there were at Bald Hills several perfectly
sacrificed everything for his sake!” she cried. “It’s splendid!
men at Borodinó was not due to Napoleon’s will, though he ordered the




impression of the misfortunes and sufferings of people and of being
Pierre wanted to speak himself. He pushed forward, feeling stirred,
“Ah, here she is!” said the old count, when he saw Natásha enter.
“Yes, yes, all right!” said the count hurriedly. “Only excuse me,

of those fifty thousand men who were left in hospitals and in graves
Napoleon) only for the purpose of securing an armed peace, the
After the roast, champagne was served. The guests rose to congratulate
and thirty men who had set out from Moscow fewer than a hundred now
She ran to meet her, embraced her, and began to cry on her shoulder.
Natásha up warmly and took leave of her with quite a new tenderness. He
family and to the crown serfs—those fields and meadows where for

“Directly!”
going: and besides—I am not Joan of Arc or an Amazon.”
And they themselves sit there nearly naked, like the signboards at our
soldiers were in marching kit with knapsacks and shakos that had metal
What struck him was that Denísov did not seem glad to see him, and
room, exclaiming and oh-ing and ah-ing.
intoxication. He felt as though he were the center of some important and
    CHAPTER VI
about that, and secondly, if the Russian nobility had that right, the
They rose from the table and sat down in the entrance porch which served
and indignity.
had endured to gain her end.
of difficulties that might be encountered, as well as fresh people who

else could tell her anything so comforting or so reasonable as this

“Well then, go, go, go...” said Rostóv, and refusing supper and
and had grown accustomed to him. Métivier came to see the prince about
room. The prince stood still; his lively glittering eyes from under
“Go and choose Denísov. He is a real dancer, a wonder!” he said.
one of the Ápsheron regiment went forward past the Emperor.
“I am sure of it, sure!” Natásha almost shouted, taking hold of both his
these last days. It was decided that the count must not go, but that if
“Have you told her?” asked Natásha, suddenly beaming all over with
which (as it seemed to him) plainly forbids remarriage while the husband
They rode up the opposite hill. From there the French could already be
In ten minutes the table was ready and a napkin spread on it. On the

Princess Anna Mikháylovna intervened in the conversation, evidently

her hand did not reach them. Pétya pushed her hand away with his knee,
anything might happen, only not that.
     *Do you know the proverb?
an agitated and serious face. As soon as he saw Natásha his face
Princess Mary went up and kissed his hand. His left hand pressed hers
events? Then listen:

Animated by that address Anna Pávlovna’s guests talked for a long time
waves of the great movement abate, and on the calm surface eddies are
“It is too late now, it’s done; besides I love her,” thought
Hélène still sat talking just as before.
like diamonds and dappled with bluish shadows. Bang, bang! went the
Princess Mary shook her head.

resting, and to halt facing Vienna with Znaim to his rear, and if he
once, long, long ago, when we were quite little, Uncle called us into
“Gentlemen, I thank you all; all arms have behaved heroically:
among the rows of new-mown hay which he had taken no notice of amid the

remarks. The old count rose once more, glanced at a note lying beside

more important cares, but he continued to speak, surprising them by
he had visited the night before with Dólokhov. The French were making

Having been taken prisoner and allowed his beard to grow, he seemed to
told Balashëv to repeat to Napoleon. Balashëv remembered these words,
advice to seek. Had my benefactor been here he would have told me what

defend it?” A prolonged and general silence followed. There was a frown
one finger, “then I have nothing to answer for; but if it is valid, no
find some way of taking on herself the excess of grief that crushed her

reviewed by the Emperor and other high commanders. Then came an order
Métivier, shrugging his shoulders, went up to Mademoiselle Bourienne
There was now no one in the reception room except Prince Vasíli and the
could not bear them.

nuisance to everybody, that snub-nosed Pétya with his merry black eyes
Vasíli’s son, Hippolyte, had come with Mortemart, whom he introduced.
and drowsy Kutúzov, who reluctantly played the part of chairman and

again to the house, she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne—who had remained

Dokhtúrov he had the reputation of being a man of very limited capacity
Dólokhov’s back in his white shirt, and his curly head, were lit
half over a sticky, muddy road, Bolkhovítinov reached Litashëvka after
of Sónya, of the governess, and of every woman, pretty or plain—were
saying?”
    CHAPTER XXVI
with one leg crossed high above the other. His cheeks, which were so
haunches and sliding, the horses descended with their riders into the
than the other; the serfs everywhere seemed thriving and touchingly
humble origin (as in fact many did), caused Prince Andrew to cherish his
different roads available for the French, and one would have thought

contrary, he is probably pursuing you with detachments, or at most with
Prince Andrew smiled.
CHAPTER VI
In a few days Princess Mary was ready to start. Her equipages were the



the Tsar!’ so they began looking for him,” here Karatáev’s lower jaw
cold tone and supposing that it was due to the condition of his
parts of the field, or to the driving of the herdsman, should attribute

one thing—to be perfectly good—so he could not be afraid of death. The

would be treated not as a sovereign, but as a criminal. Quite lately,

several thousand rubles quitrent received from Pierre’s peasants,
“You have no heart, you don’t feel for your own child! Another man would
The day before the count was to return, Sónya noticed that Natásha sat

chaffingly, but without getting angry.
expressions with the choicest French phrases—which was a peculiarity
Russians to make an idol of this useless old man, but that he knew whom
CHAPTER XX
concluded by making what amounted to a demand that Pierre should give
defense—as much as to say: ‘Heaven is with us, but heaven help you
While Pierre, standing in the middle of the room, was talking to himself

The French had been repulsed for the last time. And again and again in
must certainly come. If you love somebody, my charmer, that is not a
Pierre rushed to the wing, but the heat was so great that he
In the offices and shops and at the post office everyone was talking
that it must live in water, so God had made him such that he must spend
could be seen, and in three places to left and right the French troops

choked him, and leaning his elbows on the window sill he began to cry,
he could not stop short for the sake of one man’s life.”

creditors demanded from his father.
When Rostóv went back there was a bottle of vodka and a sausage on the
For military science to say this is like defining momentum in mechanics
obliged to admit that some of these transfers are not normal delegations

“But they heard him at the council of war and will hear him when he
ordinary staid and respectful good manners habitual in the prince’s

direct retreat on Nízhni-Nóvgorod. The army turned more to the south,
and some unknown x.





“On that day I always go to pay my devotions to the relics of Prince
the doctor. Perhaps he’ll take pity on me someday, when it comes to
matters unrelated to his past interests, and he seized on these the more
time, hearing the lighthearted French conversation from the next room.
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
“He should pay folks off properly,” a thin workingman, with frowning
to the French camp with me? I have brought a spare uniform.”

Behind him stood the aide-de-camp, the doctors, and the menservants;
the wind.
So long as histories are written of separate individuals, whether
idlers have failed to beat the Germans. Since the world began everybody
he reports that our losses were great, it is not true; perhaps about

“They are regular brigands, especially Dólokhov,” replied the

Pierre was so deep in thought that he did not hear the question. He was
All the old methods that had been unfailingly crowned with success: the
“Andrew, I bless you with this icon and you must promise me you will
Hélène, and that thought both alarmed him, as if some obligation were

The struggle between the old views and the new was long and stubbornly
After a short silence he rose.

She started, flushed, and sighed deeply.
suggested that she had resolved to endure her troubles uncomplainingly
CHAPTER XVII
command, and Barclay was unpopular; but from this confusion, division,
chief. “Be he what he may” (they always began like that), “he is an
Behind the guns were their limbers and still farther back picket ropes

Langeron, with a subtly ironical smile, again glancing round for support

an hour’s delay they at last moved on, descending the hill. The fog
Mary’s letter.
“And we, my dear boy! It’s terrible! I was wrong to laugh at Mack,
Moscow, and now allowed Madame Aubert-Chalmé (the center of the whole

When they had descended to the bridge Pétya and Dólokhov rode past the
were always some. Then she had dinner, a substantial and appetizing meal
of how beside himself and all aflame with excitement, he had flown like
isn’t it, General?” he said, evidently not doubting that this remark

passing, but before he had finished his greeting there was a general
affairs, into which we had been drawn by the Peace of Tilsit. “We
belonging to that escort, but when they reached the supply stores they
In the fourth act there was some sort of devil who sang waving his arm
something terrible.


see the expression of a higher spiritual life (that was why he did not


blood-stained smith stood beside him with a gloomy face. A drone of
When the service was over, Kutúzov stepped up to the icon, sank heavily


The French found Moscow abandoned but with all the organizations of

eyes off the French.
“Well, I will read them, then!” Bagratión seemed to say, and,
“What are they about?” thought Prince Andrew as he gazed at them.
memory, his extensive reading (he had read everything, knew everything,
“I begin ab ovo. ‘The enemy of the human race,’ as you know,
    * Old style.
When Anna Mikháylovna returned from Count Bezúkhov’s the money, all
all your valuables.”
also to the soldiers. Looking at their boots he several times shook his
and regained her former position.
An adjutant galloped up from the flèches with a pale and frightened face
The same faces, the same talk, Papa holding his cup and blowing in the
hands....”

well-ordered troops. But contrary to what had always happened in their

flattering to him. At first it seemed strange that the son of an obscure
the wedding, but the count had not yet decided in his own mind the
“Arguing? Mutiny!... Brigands! Traitors!” cried Rostóv unmeaningly in a
“Oh, I am so happy!” she replied, smiled through her tears, bent
who wished to distinguish themselves, to astonish somebody, and for some
cloak and felt boots, he went to the little princess’ apartment.

the story of his ancestors, his childhood, youth, and manhood, and all
seemed familiar to Princess Mary was saying something.
“And do you know, Daddy, the day before yesterday we ran at them and,

Pierre.

under her curls and boisterous, childish laughter, as he had known her


Every detail of the interview was communicated to the Russian monarch,

hope... but it will depend on her....”

been up to heaven only knows what! And they have had to suffer for it.
“How charming this Natásha of mine is! I have no other friend like


WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
“Yes, immediately, immediately! Hey, who’s there?” he called out
the landing. “I’d better go to my own room.”

he would have ready and to drive her forty miles to the village of

memory, and he told everybody that his son had been killed. He tried not

Prince Andrew did not reply. The carriage and horses had long since been
deeds, and while dying he expressed the love his actions had proved.
In Márya Dmítrievna’s anteroom the footman who helped him off with his

the village again, but Túshin’s guns could not move, and the
“Eh? Don’t talk nonsense!” said a sergeant major.
at the same time, aglow with excitement, recalled every detail of
and will soothe him better than a skilled man who is a stranger could.
sitting down beside him she began to speak about his father; but he

love of one’s neighbor and Christianity—and all this in the presence of
evidently much excited. Rostóv moved to the window to see whom he was

“How glad I am you’ve come! I am so happy today,” she said, with the old

where you always ran away; you remember cette chère Annette!”
CHAPTER XII
I beg of you, consider me your friend and if you want help, advice,
aside, marveling at “the old gentleman’s” conceited stupidity.
sitting up in bed and speaking softly.
very numbers and their crowded and swift movement deprived them of that
reading the letter. He went on tiptoe to the nursery door and opened it.

“What a strange fate, Másha darling!” And having taken off his

Hélène turned to Pierre with the beautiful bright smile that she gave
here...”
that Napoleon had power and so events occurred; with some effort one may
why he did not reply to what she chiefly wanted to know: how was her
said gaily.
commander in chief’s suite. He was in a state of suppressed excitement
would at last try to make a good match there. He indicated to him
Anatole sat at a table frowning and biting his lips.
each ascent or descent of the road the crowds were yet denser and the

know what would have become of me, because...”

all remained as of old, the inner relations of all these people had
her powers since morning had been concentrated on ensuring that they

to their companies, the sergeants major began bustling (the greatcoats

the activity of individuals who ruled the people, and regarded the
“They’re always in love with someone,” he thought of Sónya and
“Tomorrow very likely I may be sent with some message to the
“And your children?”
Bergs’ house, not at ten but at fifteen minutes to eight.

essence of the matter aside, shut out the possibility of that essence’s

tired out and already dressed in shawl and bonnet for her journey,
Natásha, and heard for the first time the story of those last days of
“Oh my God! Why?” Nicholas cried in despair.
nothing, nothing, nothing! No, don’t marry, my dear fellow; don’t
when he saw the minister seated at a large table reading some papers
told you, but you would not believe it,” she said triumphantly. “He
On returning from the review, Kutúzov took the Austrian general into
tails turned away from the center of the group. Two huntsmen galloped up
On the thirteenth of July the Pávlograds took part in a serious action
CHAPTER IV
was stone-still, like the moon and its light and the shadows. Prince
“Decision? What decision? Old dotard!...” cried he. “What have you been
“Is he in Moscow?” Pierre stammered with a guilty look.

to his people in Germany; and he felt greatly offended when the butler
me, it hurts. I’m old and weak and this is what you wanted. Well then,
raising him.
attempts to attain it were most shamefully baffled—then this last period
“By the Lord Jesus Christ, I thought we had put something under him!”
examining the familiar Rostóv features of the young man’s face, his
9.”
who had attacked the Russian army in order to drive it from its position
“Don’t mess Mary Hendríkhovna’s dress!” cried other voices.

enemy!” declared Natásha. “You want me to be miserable, you want us
in love. The marshals stood behind him not venturing to distract his
“He is a man in a gray overcoat, very anxious that I should call
after that he did not meddle in business affairs. But once the countess

and began to speak. A throng of officers surrounded him. He looked
aggression. In fact, the ambassador, as he himself has declared, was
Nicholas brusquely (imagining this to be characteristically military)
If at first the members of the council thought that Kutúzov was
repurchasing Otrádnoe before long, and added: “Another ten years of life
I stepped on it, but it bent and gave way and I began to clamber up a
a deserted and ruined village to which he had come in search of
“But... no,” said Pétya, “I don’t want to sleep yet. Besides I know
mud and clanking the ring of his leash, walked along just behind
creatures, and he so longed to find in someone the living ideal of that
lying—he alone could justify what had to be done.
That feeling of alertness and of readiness for anything was still
prince had had a seizure paralyzing his right side.
A week before the French had had boot leather and linen issued to them,
by Kutúzov was hurriedly retreating along the Danube, stopping where
Cossacks, and all who were in the camp, undressed and only just waking
“Tproo! Get out of the way! Hi!... Tproo!...” The shouting of Balagá

When Prince Andrew left the palace he felt that all the interest

front and men four abreast, spread across the bridge and began to emerge

Sónya and Dólokhov before dinner, and with the kindly sensitiveness
to move about and talk, dressmakers came again. Márya Dmítrievna
hated, or guilty, were simply unnecessary. Some Russians even did that,
and had now, as if purposely, sent his men to the very woods the

Gervais gave a long account of an official revision, remarkable for the

pale and ill. He had been feverish for two days and was now shivering
he had been ordered to look for the commander in chief, he could not,

you are hiding in terror, return to your huts without fear, in full
continued Nicholas. “We must hope for the best, and I am sure...”
standing on the highest possible pinnacle of human power with the
     * To understand all is to forgive all.
mirth were in their hearts and so everything that happened was a cause
mathematically clear, as it is that if when playing draughts I have one
life one may discriminate between those in which substance prevails
“Lázarev!” the colonel called, with a frown, and Lázarev, the
The captain made a gesture signifying that even if he did not understand
shedding tears of joy and excitement and embracing her mother.
“Filez, filez!” * Dólokhov kept saying, having adopted this expression
bright green stood out sharply against the brownish strips of winter rye
will not say comfort us—but save us from despair. Religion alone can
by the movement he had made in sitting up, fluttered under the dark roof

crime one commits, ascribing to it an incomprehensible supernatural
As soon as the King began to speak loud and fast his royal dignity
eyebrows and looking uneasily and timidly at her.
Dólokhov, without answering, took the cloak, threw it over Matrëna, and

thwee hundwed men to town under escort, instead of staining—I speak

The first was a feeling of the necessity of sacrifice and suffering in

Borís remembered Natásha in a short dress, with dark eyes shining from
chestnut Donéts, and whistling to his own leash of borzois, set off
where she was going and with whom. Having fallen into the line of
Occasionally he stopped, listened to the firing, and gazed intently at
And then to call him out, reckoning on Fédya not fighting because he
Italian: “‘Dio mi l’ha dato. Guai a chi la tocchi!’’
“I’ll kill you!” he shouted, and seizing the marble top of a table
“Piti-piti-piti and ti-ti and piti-piti-piti boom!” flopped the fly....
dandies, the lower part of his face hidden by his beaver collar and his
“You’re not asleep?” Natásha jumped up, snatched up her slippers,


“We’ll make you dance as we did under Suvórov...,” * said
against the pillow.
of needles, he also saw by glimpses a red halo round the candle, and
But in January Savélich came from Moscow and gave him an account of the
before, a soldier was lying athwart the rows of scented hay, with his
pointing out the French to the cavalry.
thousand, that’s war! But the enemy has lost masses....
and by a servant who passed out on tiptoe without heeding them. They
slope of the hill amid the smoke a Russian battery that was still firing
Ten minutes later Lavrúshka brought the coffee. “He’s coming!”
He screwed up his eyes, smiled, lifted her chin with his hand, and said:
“What was it about?” asked Nicholas.
methodical.”
He hired the first cab he met and told the driver to go to the
rid himself of them he closed his eyes.
inevitable results which prevent our considering anything else possible.
me about yourself.”
lost more than he could pay.
Beyond Shámshevo, Dólokhov was to observe the road in the same way, to

to think, as he listened to Zdrzhinski. But he did not express his
The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table and considered
“I can’t think what the servants are about,” said the countess, turning
trap, and a baggage cart. With her traveled Mademoiselle Bourienne,
than a yard above the glow of the charcoal. Flakes of falling snow were
seriously.
love you.”
“Has he taken his medicine?”
drawing room.
prince’s household. General in Chief Prince Nicholas Andréevich
front of the ranks. Suddenly one shot after another rang out from the

“I? What have I...?” stammered Pierre.
her shabbiest dress and an old mantilla, Natásha, shivering in the fresh
guerrillas, Kutúzov was almost sure that the wound was mortal. But he
every moment, not explaining or consoling, but recalling her to life.
But Borís spoke distinctly, clearly, and dryly, looking straight into
an anteroom, and a hall, which were familiar to him, into a long low


“I don’t know anything about it,” said Pierre.
Prince Andrew remembered nothing more: he lost consciousness from the

cried the old count. “My head’s in a whirl!”

“Why are you here?” Prince Andrew repeated.

Natásha looked in the direction in which her father’s eyes were

talent and virtue: raising worthy men from the dust and attaching
have a room of your own,” and she took the inkstand from Nicholas.

seventy-year-old magnates, uniformed and besashed almost all of whom
clever.”
responsibility, very judiciously wished to receive.
homes and go to Moscow and to get carts ready for tomorrow morning
were near him. Everybody said that Buonaparte himself was at Braunau.”
“Gentlemen, who wishes to bet with me? I’ll do the same thing!”
This unshakable, irrefutable consciousness of freedom, uncontrolled by

Pierre’s gloomy, unhappy look struck her. She stopped in front of him.
pushing back his chair, he rose from the table.
French troops who are being raised in France will join us, and the peace
on my heels, putting my arms round my knees like this, straining tight,
from the commune.
“Why do you say this young man is so rich?” asked the countess,

and eight feet long. At one end of the trench, steps were cut out and
and insignificant people. But the army, the Russian army, everyone


But strange to say, all these measures, efforts, and plans—which were
Natásha felt happy and agitated, but at once remembered that this would
amid the square masses of troops standing motionless as if turned to

her own spiritual baseness, which she had not suspected, but which had
CHAPTER XII

“So they will,” said Nesvítski. “No, but what I should like,”
things into his mother’s language, “Prince Alexander Golítsyn has
CHAPTER IV
It was a warm, rainy, autumnal day. The wide expanse that opened out
the conception of the infinitely small, and the resulting geometrical
bushes and were firing at the Cossacks who crowded at the gateway.
He bowed his head and scraped first with one foot and then with the


“Something special is always said in such cases,” he thought, but
But those glances expressed something more: they said that she had
“Your excellency, there are some political prisoners, Meshkóv,
his arm.
house with Prince Bagratión and Weyrother. Weyrother was the Austrian

village. “Very good!” said Bagratión in reply to the officer’s
his instinct urged him on. Before the officer finished his sentence
with a more tranquil mind.
She went in and sat down by her husband.
but remarked that besides these changes it would be necessary to go into
and Nicholas’ letter to the Rostóvs, keeping the appeal, the bulletin,
around which tens of thousands fell, and which the French regarded as
The officers laughed.

battle would still not take place. It would not take place because the
it is only a momentary undefinable sensation of life.
was to explain the whole affair by word of mouth, besides delivering
weep without knowing why—rode behind on his artillery nag. Though
Provincial life in 1812 went on very much as usual, but with this
“And I?” he said; “do you think it is easier for me? I am as worn
cross it and ride over the black field up the hillside. To keep to the

life is destroyed.
intelligent, how is it you don’t see that if the count has written a
statistics. What is man’s responsibility to society, the conception of
Hardly had Prince Andrew started than he stopped him.
rose and with her heavy tread went up to the table. She took a sheet of



the screen of trees was less dense. On reaching a large oak tree that
her since he last saw her was immense. She had grown thin and pale, but
link which other people recognized had grown up between himself and
unworthiness, and in Thy great goodness and Thy many mercies regard not
lost his head, and that it was probable that he had an understanding
back.
and health. All who talked to her, and at each word saw her bright smile
exist, for then man’s will is subject to that law.
done up.
“Nicholas, have you come? Come here, dear!” called the old countess

dangers.
but the love which I—while dying—first experienced when I saw my enemy
felt coat, stretched his legs, and set his cap straight. The head of the
outer man? There was a time when I could have done it. I could have run
did not hearken to his appeal. At the very moment when she would have
“The Gospels. I haven’t one.”

angrier at having blushed, and looked at the princess with a bold and
self-possession mingled at that moment in Rostóv’s soul.
gave an order, and the dragoons formed up in line. The crowd moved
That same night, Rostóv was with a platoon on skirmishing duty in front

they still brought up the charges, loaded, aimed, and applied the match,
count. “She’s as good as many a man!”
one of the lodges over the road purposely laden with snow.
the front, but at Dürrenstein, where I was, our attack began after


in her room, making her eat and drink, and talking to her incessantly
sacrifices I know how to appreciate.”
“Ah, you’re back?”
eyes inquiringly on him.

cannon aimed at me?”
in no way binding) might give time for part of the transport to pass,

heard at the staff.
the combs, and the short home bees, shriveled and listless as if they
understood himself. Princess Mary well knew this mood of quiet absorbed
on the frightened, exhausted, and hesitating men, as if to say: “Enough,
“Routed up the earth like a pig,” said another.
Alarmed at Denísov’s condition, Rostóv suggested that he should
of the crowd.

forces of Western Europe crossed the Russian frontier and war began,
Rome, the son and heir of their adored monarch.
“Ah, Vesénny?” said a Cossack.
between two rows of birch trees.
not you! Go back or I’ll flatten you into a pancake,” repeated he.
During the three days preceding the occupation of Moscow the whole
Natásha involuntarily gazed at that neck, those shoulders, and pearls
nurses who knit stockings, and that there is something soothing in
the guests. To each of them he made some careless and agreeable remark
in his coffin with his chin bound up with a white handkerchief. And the
He stopped and remained silent for a long time.
clear upright figures; he emptied the glass of warm champagne that was
and she, smiling and shaking a finger at Hippolyte, invited Prince
The Emperor, frowning slightly, bent his ear forward as if he had not
the cot where she was standing, “better wait a bit... later...”
untruth and was becoming entangled. She began to cry.
sort of borzoi she is,” and turning to his groom, he said he would
order of Maria Theresa on his neck and a black bandage round his head,
do me the honor of calling on me on Wednesday,” he added, “I will,
“Whom do you want?” someone inquired.
with the flirtatiousness of a handsome youth at Sónya and the young

quite covered by an apron. On the box beside the driver sat a venerable

it without undressing and immediately fell asleep.
at her reproachfully. “And who is it she takes after?” thought the
happened to her, but she felt herself the representative of her dead
to show from behind the lime trees, a fresh white dewy mist began to

Tarás the gardener, but no one replied. Having gone round the corner
a result of this, he galloped up to the wolf just when she had been
Though Nicholas Rostóv had kept firmly to his resolution and was still

to it, from Borodinó to Utítsa, at the very place where the battle was

“We were talking to him about you a few days ago,” Kochubéy
the next night. More than once he had enabled Dólokhov to escape when
Christ, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord Jesus Christ, have
what they told her, and convinced that say what she might she would
assumption that everybody’s welfare depended on this or that issue
“O Lord, O Lord, it’s always the same! Oh, where am I to go? What
her that evening. Even those playing cards behind the partition soon
longer and was no longer alien to him, but he himself having entered it
worried too about her nephew’s education for which she had always felt
who usually left town for their country estates had not gone away that
“Well it won’t be for long. Next summer I’ll take him to Petersburg,”
seemed to him insincere; he did not know how to judge all these affairs
their long hair falling over their magnificent glittering vestments,
and I sta’ted fwashing him... Well, I’ve had a bit of fun I can tell
anxiously how things would be at Otrádnoe and what he would find
The postmaster came in and began obsequiously to beg his excellency to

her eyes. Then he added:
fought.
be brought here well wrapped up in felt. I must have two hundred pots


which the base with the largest diameter consists of the rank and file;
himself fall into a trap Moreau set him, and from which he did not know
“I shall always remember that in this world one must expect no reward,
No, but I know I must work to comfort my mother, to repay you, and not
that so agitated society—abolishing court ranks and introducing

have told you”; and not replying a word to Berg who was now mute beside
angry. It made him angry just because the idea of marrying the gentle
and sinking down again into her former position.
that it was a letter from him—from the man she loved. Yes, she loved
darkness, and the drummer boy came to the door.



free to take his goods back to his village and no one may hinder him
held it till evening and have gone in to dinner with it) and drew his
Emperor’s arrival, lay several killed and wounded soldiers whom there

a few steps, turned, cut a caper, brought her little feet sharply

information received of the movements of the French was never reliable.
that...” she went on in a trembling voice, “that you can do nothing
    CHAPTER XXIII
that his heart stood still. His hand trembled as he gave his horse into
eyes from him, but braced himself up more and more and held his head
eager curiosity to the stage. Natásha too began to look at it.
severely, saying that he ought to be shot. General Bagovút, a fighting

to his knees, bowed to the ground, and for a long time tried vainly to
French had been retaken, but that Prince Bagratión was wounded. Kutúzov
rode toward Balashëv at a gallop, his plumes flowing and his gems and
“Mother! The dew is cold but clear.... It’s well that I’m a
white Cossack coat, and bring him along to me.”

of carpenters hoping for high pay arrived in Moscow every day, and on
standing they could see the French. Immediately beyond the forest, on a

Toward dawn, Count Orlóv-Denísov, who had dozed off, was awakened by a

surrenders without a shot; his most reckless schemes are crowned with
own particular tone. The largest of these was the French circle of the
“Bad! Bad!” exclaimed Pierre. “We all know what is bad for


to her need of children and a husband—as she herself had once exclaimed

may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
General Schmidt, who was killed in the action. His horse had been
no getting them together. The army should push on before the rest bolt,
go of its nuts. Ten minutes after each regiment had entered a Moscow
for a seat.
these words pained her for a moment. She remembered her brother and his
chairs and pushed them up again. Pierre unfolded his cold table napkin

her and yet was beloved by everybody. And for the first time Sónya felt
the revenue from the Pénza estates which he had already mentally


a good thing for proprietors who perish morally, bring remorse upon
like Prince Andrew) and he referred to it contemptuously as philosophy
he was wanted—that chevalier sans peur et sans reproche * as he styled
compromising her and committing himself, would now go boldly every day
(He smiled ironically.) “But even if he also took up a position in
occupied. He was himself always occupied: writing his memoirs, solving
a ring, he made the sign of the cross over him with a gesture evidently
Rostóv himself, his legs well back and his stomach drawn in and feeling

once again, as usurpations of power. And so these historians also see

had been decided to advance immediately and give battle to Bonaparte.
advancing from Russia, without losing his army as Mack had done at Ulm.
had arranged to be free to pass himself off as a bachelor.

enlighten their minds, by means handed on to us by tradition from those
saying,” said some of the mob pointing to the tall youth.

to slash at and drown one another. They killed the king and many other
want that. And besides, what a notion that medicine ever cured anyone!
sometimes keeping well back in them and sometimes coming to the very
The smile vanished from Speránski’s white face, which was much

lid, and made desperate efforts herself.

labor was thus increased, though lessened on paper. He did not know
bright-blue Sèvres tea cup with shepherdesses depicted on it and with

essential connection of historical persons with the masses.

affectionately.
right.
child’s little chair while, frowning and with trembling hands, he
ranks, and it ceased altogether every time the thud of a successful
foreigner who sees her, even if ignorant of her significance as the
    CHAPTER XI
“Well then, remember, this is not a joke!”
at the door Prince Andrew and the figure of the old man in a white
citizens are returning every day to their homes and orders have been

eyes and shrinking, he tried to pass unnoticed between the rows of
experience that feeling during those memorable days preceding the battle
supposed to be a man of genius—Speránski. And this movement of
question, with a motion toward Natásha.
can be defined and everything depends on innumerable conditions, the

yourself imagine the effect this news has had on me, and your silence
speaking to, and saw the quartermaster, Topchéenko.

ballroom an old lady in a hooped skirt—this was Nicholas. A Turkish
and his eyes were rolled back. Rostóv looked at the young soldier and a
her. She did not think of applying submission and self-abnegation to her
CHAPTER XIX
being done there.
all that would be required of him.
“As you see,” he said.
“The step must be taken but I cannot, I cannot!” thought Pierre,
of all our levies, both those now barring the enemy’s path and those
As Pierre was entering the reception room a courier from the army came
    CHAPTER IV
detachment and by evening found his master, Nicholas Rostóv, quartered
elopement, with additions.
followed her and spoken laughingly of her brother’s love, and that she

“Well, good-by, my dear fellow; remember that with all my heart I share

exhausted and six thousand men sacrificed to defend it till late at

They, in Pierre’s mind, were the soldiers, those who had been at the

bathed in moonlight and motionless spread out before them glittering

“To be a soldier, just a soldier!” thought Pierre as he fell asleep,
began riding downhill to where the roll of musketry was heard but where
upon him he read sympathy with what he had said. His face grew brighter

conversation with her, when Anna Pávlovna called him away on the
quite heard.

that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
Pétya did not know how long this lasted: he enjoyed himself all the
and like him. Write and tell me how he receives you. If he is all
One army fled and the other pursued. Beyond Smolénsk there were several
    CHAPTER IV
the thought of his wife which had been a continual torment to him was no
and so on to the highest military command which is concentrated in one
unfortunate capacity many men, especially Russians, have of seeing and
while we, on the other hand, with our left wing by far outflank his
consider the movement of those hundreds of thousands of men who took a
blocked, it could not carry across the frontier more than it actually

must remain hidden from thee, but live so that thou mayest be ready for
German’s self-assurance is worst of all, stronger and more
sighing...” thought Princess Mary.
was too far separated from our right flank and the cavalry were all
peculiarity of his speech was its directness and appositeness. It was

on.

the nonsense talked by the Austrian generals. Shinshín, standing close
Anna Mikháylovna instantly guessed her intention and stooped to be
coming. And Nicholas, who had vainly suffered all the dread that

    CHAPTER I
fellow.”
    CHAPTER XII
was calm, though a severe and grave expression had again settled on her
chief—also took it into his head to lecture me: ‘It’s
disease, culture and ignorance, work and leisure, repletion and hunger,
things that he has been expelled by the police.”


Natásha looked at Sónya with wondering and inquisitive eyes, and said
clattering. These men pressed close to the wall to let Pierre and Anna
offend me. Really I have some,” Rostóv repeated.
except Natásha, and then called her pet to her armchair.
and she’s even in my way. You know I always was a savage, and now am
we have thrown up three redoubts there, very strong ones. The left
thought that this man did not, and never would, know any of those who
it can’t be a square—for they are not drawn up for that.”
family. Military, administrative, political, and Masonic interests
and reported to Napoleon that their attack had been repulsed, Campan
Among the opinions and voices in this immense, restless, brilliant,
Rostóvs, and the party became unquestionably exactly like all other
Buxhöwden’s part and an epileptic fit on Bennigsen’s. But at the
men of his squadron who, unknown to him, had appropriated five barrels

“How is he?”
question whether the camp was advantageous or disadvantageous remained
Molliten.”
hand holding the Order touched one of Lázarev’s buttons. It was as if
not to tell the whole truth which she saw. And suddenly, Natásha’s lips
for it; but when her youngest: the scapegrace who had been bad at
in to the utmost, their red necks squeezed into their stiff collars, and

“The island of Madagascar,” she said, “Ma-da-gas-car,” she
She spent the night of the fourteenth as usual, without undressing, in

Another shook his head.
badly through his spectacles, but that his wife’s connection with
blazing briskly. The walls were all on fire and the back wall had fallen
with a decorous smile of self-satisfaction at being able clearly to
    * “Tell me, is Colonel Gérard here?”
and corn as of his own, and few landowners had their crops sown
behind by that terror, opened and closed again.
already known in Moscow and that the ladies about his father—who were
“No, I don’t want that, I don’t want to see and understand that. I want
the contempt with which Rostóv, from his fighting army point of view,
some particular incident. So now the courtiers’ pleasure was based as
events may be explained by the fact that certain persons treated one
“You know, love, I wanted to tell you... Countess dear... an officer
    CHAPTER IV
this was not enough. She knew that, and asked herself, “What next?”
this same room was dimly lighted by two candles. On one small table tea
knitting, went to the window and leaning out tried to catch the open
Two more prisoners were led up. In the same way and with similar looks,
Mikháylovna. Though the latter held on tenaciously, her voice lost none

columns of French should show themselves.
authority of the kings and the “fate” of the ancients, to reach the same
would be killed.
thoughts with the bitter conviction that he would not be understood.
of the crowd and the shrieks of the woman were due to the fact that


On the evening of the last day’s march an order had been received that
And collecting the presents they went first to the nursery and then to

resolutely took the salver with both hands and looked sternly and
it was far to the Krémlin. The porter, listening in perplexity to the
recaptured by the French and shot.
Mary.
falling from the window, she listened to the words of the service which
laughter that convulsed his usually impassive features.
“Now come, come! Be reasonable. I know your excellent heart.”

given, to clear himself of the crime of abandoning Moscow. But this
revenge in their soul yields to a feeling of contempt and compassion.
friend...”
her conduct and the breaking off of her engagement, receded into the
arrangements, the count grew quite tranquil.
among others awaiting him in his reception room there was a Frenchman
Túshin turned round in dismay. It was the staff officer who had turned
of whether he were heard or not.
of the carriage.
must be abandoned. The army must retreat and the order to do so must
to hear the words she had uttered and to see before him her eyes, her

scintillating and twinkling in the sunshine. But I shall spare her. On
others an enemy in regard to Anatole? As for Pierre, he evidently did
had remained uninjured and needed only slight repairs. Life did not
what the nobility had been convened for, the talk became undecided and
another in the large hall and they whispered to one another. Then a
“Well, say you went to the barn now, and listened. It depends on what
“Your excellency,” said Rostóv, “may I ask a favor?”
“No, don’t... the island of Madagascar!” she said, and jumping off
of Kiev ware. “These—yes, these must go among the carpets,” she said,
him, as a king and an ally, to confer on state affairs with Alexander’s
individuals, and should have been induced to do so by an infinite number
not dare to. He stood irresolutely beside him in the passage. Then in
event!”

She hummed a scrap from her favorite opera by Cherubini, threw herself
were old, creep slowly about without trying to hinder the robbers,
for which I am ready to die.”
silence brooding over the house and within it held her fast.

and that they were being taken to the proper place. Pierre felt himself

“The Grand Marshal of the palace,” wrote the governor, “complains
fading princesses still lived, with its enormous retinue; as soon as,

“But why don’t you want to take it?” she asked again.
going on in Russia without despair and without dismally racking his
aglow with dazzling light—as if he had only awaited this to begin the
from side to side, gave a couple of leaps and with a swish of its tail

“It seems it’s no use knocking one’s head against a wall!” he
Why had such a splendid boy, so full of life, to die?”


“Be quiet, quiet!” The prince slapped his hand on the table. “Yes, I
the Petersburg Berëzina plan would be attributed to Kutúzov led

never-varying direction of his will otherwise than as a limitation of
“All right, one can’t talk—how tiresome!”
“Please be quick,” he said.
escorted him to the door, repeating something to him several times in
gone to Petersburg, but Prince Andrew was glad to hear this. His mind

CHAPTER XIII
recognized his lamented and adored monarch.
been inherited by his son, whose guardian he was.
And these simple words, her look, and the expression on her face which
now, war is the favorite pastime of the idle and frivolous. The military
The entire household was governed according to Pierre’s supposed orders,
daughter is so young, and I thought that, as my son’s friend, you
“A future life?” Prince Andrew repeated, but Pierre, giving him no
well as by the proximity of the enemy, resolved to advance. All his men
away from him. The alliance with Prussia, Austria’s treachery,

success.”

“I see, Colonel, from all that is happening, that Providence requires
vigorous and alert, entering Potëmkin’s gaily colored tent, and a
other virtues—love of his neighbor, and especially generosity.
moments, he strode back to Michaud and pressed his arm below the elbow
been trying first one remedy and then another. Worn out by sleeplessness

in Anísya and in Anísya’s father and mother and aunt, and in every
rose, frowned, shrugged his shoulders, and evidently trying to appear
Pétya’s eyes began to close and he swayed a little.

CHAPTER XV
would have me be, but I have never had help from anyone.... But it is
approaching enemy unexpectedly. Bennigsen did not know this and moved
the contrary, the deviations made from his theory were, in his opinion,
enjoyment from that reading.

of the old prince had not disturbed the order of things in the house,
our men or theirs run or do not run, and that this man or that man is
She seemed to promise to explain that necessity to him when he came on
luxury, and governmental and religious institutions. These forms were
“I think, however, that these condemnations have some ground,”
their age.

“Here she is, the reward for all those fainthearted men,” he reflected,
theory arrived at by years of toil, should be carried out. He was
king waved his right arm and, evidently nervous, sang something badly
understood all the difficulties of the Russian army’s position, and
lunch as he had promised. He was in very good spirits; the affair with
diplomatic career in comparison with Pierre’s happiness. The old

presently. I am delighted to meet a compatriot. Well, and what are we

always liable to do of late—“I can only say that if there are any
The floor of the stage consisted of smooth boards, at the sides was
one of the best matches in Russia.

others. He was instinctively and thoroughly convinced that it was

come from Prince Andrew, from Rome, in which he wrote that he would have


“The one in pink is mine, so keep off!” said Ilyín on seeing Dunyásha
idea. And imagining that in this direction something important which


stopped the company.” Dólokhov breathed heavily from weariness and
“After all, you must understand that besides your pleasure there is such
the whole position of our troops. Pierre listened to him, straining each
In spite of the trampling of the French gendarmes’ horses, which
before and was less frequently at home.
“Things get worse from hour to hour!” ejaculated Márya Dmítrievna. “A

him, went on reading his paper.
for your obstinacy,” said Kírsten.
one, a young soldier, his face deadly pale, his shako pushed back, and

of Prince Andrew Bolkónski, appointed to the command of a regiment of
her in his arms. But seeing a stranger the sickly, scrofulous-looking
might say something about him. “There she is again! As if it were on
this opinion, but as soon as he expressed it Karp and others attacked
galloping back. Rostóv, picking out one on a gray horse, dashed after
himself for his weakness, and raising his head addressed Michaud in a
itself in two places, how the ropes slackened under the weight of the
what he was to do. The coming of these visitors annoyed him. “What are
lingered for a moment.

former pupil of his.
lay in abandoning the immediate sensation of the earth’s fixity and of
his sons there, it could have had no effect except perhaps on some dozen
reporting matters to the higher command, to attack and seize that
a blue headdress, who had just finished her game of cards with the most

CHAPTER II
beside Mávra Kuzmínichna.
settled into three groups. One, chiefly masculine, had formed round
The patches grew deeper on her forehead, neck, and cheeks. She tried to
again put it off. But in the spring of that year, he received a letter
city. Pierre had warned his brother-in-law that Prince Andrew was on
to control herself any longer, she jumped up and rushed from the room as
letters to Nicholas from all the household were written and copied out,
And really he only ran a few steps alone. One soldier moved and then
The grown-up members of the family, not to mention his wife, were
precisely when, or by whom, it was decided to move to Tarútino. Only
continued to turn over the pages and read. In the diary was set down
was struck by the change in him. His words were kindly and there was a

fortune. Suddenly he heard a familiar voice repeating something to him a
on and not block the way.
the militia—we can leave to the supreme authority....”
was going on, she called Sónya to her and, instead of reproaching and
“I want nothing, and I won’t be anyone’s adjutant.”
CHAPTER XVII
firmness and certainty of his vocation, which radiated from his whole
impossible to stop them,” he reported.
descried.
“Now, Miss Sónya is sure to see something,” whispered Dunyásha;
Young Nicholas, now a slim lad of fifteen, delicate and intelligent,

the Rostóvs’ visit.
considering the multiplicity and complexity of the conditions any one
worldly sciences of physics, history, chemistry, and the like, into

“No, I meant to ask...” Pierre began, but Prince Andrew interrupted
me?” he said to God. “I know Thou art great, and that it is a sin to
concerning... you know. Well my dear child, you know how your father’s
the war and had no perception whatever of the inevitable, or of the one
“Stop it!” he exclaimed peremptorily. “There’s a fight, lads!” And,
“Did you hear of the last event at the review in Petersburg? The

him to come up; Prince Bagratión reined in his horse and recognizing

that I’m a sharper, so I advise you to be careful.”
These first days, before the eighth of September when the prisoners were
attracted Rostóv’s attention. This man was speaking to someone in the
monarch. ‘Boyars,’ I will say to them, ‘I do not desire war, I desire

Having reached the Patriarch’s Ponds Pierre found the Bazdéevs’ house,
One of the generals rode up to Napoleon and ventured to offer to lead
his influence with the commander in chief to induce him to take the
“Whom do you mean, Aunt?” asked Nicholas.
The Frenchman’s chatter which had previously amused Pierre now repelled
“When did you get the letter? Was it from Olmütz?” repeated

CHAPTER VIII
friendliest terms—galloped back over abominable roads, in the brightest
“Which lady?”
He is an aide-de-camp of Kutúzov’s and will be here tonight.”
“André,” said his wife, addressing her husband in the same
In 1812 and 1813 Kutúzov was openly accused of blundering. The Emperor
“All right, immediately,” he replied to a dresser who pointed Prince
Two maids were turning up the hem and hurriedly biting off the ends of
The adjutant bent his head affirmatively and began to report, but the
feel the distance that ought to separate them at that moment. Natásha
before. It was a German cart with a pair of horses led by a German, and

insolent, hard, and mocking face as he had seen it at the banquet, and
“I agreed,” Natásha now said to herself, “that it would be dreadful if

a three days’ rest and then, on the sixteenth of September, to go on
Dólokhov’s words into English. A thin young lad, an hussar of the

some approaching achievement, and some in course of disintegration. He

were not to be sent to work, assistance was to be given to the serfs,
face, and Prince Andrew saw that Hippolyte, of whom—he had to
dying,” replied the maid with a sigh.

incomprehensible, supernatural force—a miracle—one cannot admit that
a friendly way that the commander and the officers were higher up
to Rostóv’s face, and his sobs were audible.

from the truth in describing the condition of an army) and this is what

trying to give an expressive intonation to his voice.
gown, he went to the couch on which he slept.
“Is he tall and with reddish hair?” asked the doctor.

that very night if possible. With a woman’s involuntary loving cunning
and devotion, or of weariness and hope of resting before long. Prince
me: it hurts the same whichever finger gets bitten. But if Platón hadn’t
of troops the more was he overcome by restless agitation and a new and
“All is over,” he thought, and a cold sweat broke out on his

he chanced to meet Dólokhov’s handsome insolent eyes, Pierre felt
their cleanliness and discipline. They had come by easy stages, their
He gave her a cold, angry look and offered her his wrinkled,
their commands are often not executed, and sometimes the very opposite
Mary, but did not at once take his arm from the waist of Mademoiselle
Márya Dmítrievna informed him that Natásha had refused Prince Andrew
covered by smoke clouds from the guns, and the slanting rays of the




The remains of our regiment which had been in action rapidly formed up
in this way, the study door opened and on the threshold appeared
its handsome, sensual mouth, and its cold, majestic expression, was

the cause of his dispositions not being as well-planned as on former
“So this is what the Emperor is!” thought Pétya. “No, I can’t petition
who stood ready to assist him.
But at that moment an adjutant entered and reported something to Davout.
fully understanding what she was asking of God in that prayer. She
    CHAPTER XXVI
the terrible memory would, on the contrary, dwell in his heart ever more
acquaintance.’ In a word, those gentlemen, Gascons indeed, so
the crowned heads of Europe. The discredited rulers of the world can
long wished for such a box, but as she did not want to cry just then she
worried by the curiosity of officers and generals who questioned him, he
your greatest pleasure is to be unpleasant to people! Go and flirt with

hundred yards after that before he saw to his left, across the whole
over to the new one and by their hum drowned and obscured the voices of
to distraction! One learns many things then,” she added with a certain

of Sónya, who blushed and smiled unnaturally. In the midst of his talk
could be seen.

to this occurrence than to the rest of what went on, having made up his
“He is very much altered now,” said Anna Mikháylovna. “Well, as
“Yes, Princess,” said Nicholas at last with a sad smile, “it doesn’t
he gave me a notebook, the one I am now writing in and in which I will
the ground, the other being caught in the stirrup. His eyes, screwed

repeated the field marshal’s address, begun solemnly and then changing
of which Kutúzov was standing began to shout, he rode a little to one

“The prince is not very well: bile and rush of blood to the head. Keep

manner: they were all evidently firmly convinced of Pierre’s noble
So she decided that it was necessary to prepare the opinion of society.
action—he drew the glove from his shapely white hand, made a sign

difficulty.

staff officer smiled.) “Kindly return to your posts, gentlemen, all of


struggle, but with naïve and lighthearted gaiety.
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.
my mind gave him the most malevolent and bitter replies. I recollected
realized that something dreadful had happened to his regiment, and the
a cloak, waiting for the conversation to finish. They listened to


they contain; for how can we, miserable sinners that we are, know the

“Sónya! Sónya!” he again heard the first speaker. “Oh, how can
coughing of the musicians were heard from the gallery.
that day and on which an intense, concentrated fire from several hundred
lodge.

don’t feel that weakness in myself as yet, I know a little person who
These latter the butler thrust mysteriously forward, wrapped in a
Only young Nicholas and his tutor remained. Dessalles whispered to the
edge, but never losing sight of the moving French. That morning,
together,” he thought, repeating words of Karatáev’s which he found

“Mind and don’t let her slip!”
don’t wish to let me go, I’ll stay. But I know I am no use anywhere
happiness in it. “How is it that no one realizes this?” thought
“Why not wash? That is not cleanly,” said Prince Andrew; “on the
insignificant, but when used appositely suddenly acquire a significance
sount ze retreat!”
passed along the road and quickly disappeared amid the trees in the mist


countess, who sat holding in one hand the snuffbox with its portrait and
The first Russians to enter Moscow were the Cossacks of Wintzingerode’s

especially at the one running toward them.
noble soul, able to understand her position and her sorrow. His kind,
three-pronged fork will be best of all: a Frenchman is no heavier than a
occasionally drew it down to meet the lower lip. As is always the case
wife, and that it could not be otherwise.
“The count has not left, he is here, and an order will be issued
feet in low shoes, Iogel flew first across the hall with Natásha, who,
had at the opera—gratified vanity at his admiration of her and fear at
While this was being given, Prince Andrew heard the whisper of a woman’s

As the mazurka began, Borís saw that Adjutant General Balashëv, one of

him amiably but behaved as if Balashëv were one of his own courtiers,

Alpátych felt that this unreasonable action might produce good results.
and more vivid than ever, awoke in his soul. He now remembered the
“They might call a halt here or we’ll have to do another four miles
philosophic theories—that from the point of view of reason man is
have to prove to them what he had not merely convinced himself of, but
his last visit to Moscow.
Andrew. He said that Freemasonry is the teaching of Christianity freed
some great change had come over him that day. He was silent all through
served there as you do. I remember you at Austerlitz.... I remember,

personal feeling became interwoven in the prayers with shades of its
“Carrot ices.”
possibility of being what they were. And they with their simple, kind,

the resulting force. To define and express the significance of this
The theory seems irrefutable just because the act of transference of the
addressed, though he was sorry for the wounded, resolutely refused,
judges,” he replied, thinking that he was repeating what he had said
him:
face linked itself up with Kutúzov’s remembrance of his personality.
seemed to her to be an effort, it seemed so natural for him to be kind
Paulucci, as the Emperor mounted the steps and noticing Prince Andrew
of occurrences; but each command follows from another, and never refers

trembling with emotion, solemnly holding up in both hands before her

understood the Revolution and quelled it, and so for the general good,
that she loves him! She probably opened the letter without knowing who
what was being said by one or other of these groups he generally turned
and the serfs had something served to them in the ballroom.
All that day the hounds remained at home. It was frosty and the air was
high time!”


French Emperor’s love and habit of war coinciding with his people’s
but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world is
Why speak, when words cannot express what one feels?”


commander in chief. Bagratión knew that as the distance between the two
     * God has given it to me, let him who touches it beware!
learning that he was a special messenger led him to another entrance.
said that the fiscal system must be reorganized and the accounts


of reason is the assumption of and search for a cause, for without a
action, this section also represented nationalism, which made them still
conveniently to keep them under observation, brought them into the
“No, no! A thousand times no! I shall never agree with you,” said
The order was to find a ford and to cross the river. The colonel of the
habitual to him. His face took on the stupid artificial smile (which
nothing for the house, and now you wish to throw away all our—all the
Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbé as tutor,
to you on my honor that Napoleon was in such a fix as never before and

free.’ Isn’t that lovely and noble! Yes, very noble? Isn’t it?”
we combine in one simultaneous expression a whole series of consecutive
the cross on Lázarev’s breast and, dropping his hand, turned toward
humiliate her deliberately, but to show her that she was always to blame
He looked intently and inquiringly into his friend’s eyes, evidently
The captain was so naïvely and good-humoredly gay, so real, and so

wife and, for a payment which he agreed to send to his father-in-law,
the Guards. He was clean-shaven and wore a Guardsman’s padded coat with
It was past one o’clock when Pierre left his friend. It was a
the men with a rapid movement of his chin.
the swift sinister whistle of a cannon ball, now with the agreeable
Borís was excited by the thought of being so close to the higher powers

which intellectual knowledge is divided. The highest wisdom is one.
“Are you living with your mother?”
what she was doing, and then went up to her mother and stood without
“Splendid! Excellent!” exclaimed Natásha. “Another verse,” she
the abundance of it in the other—a spirituality he himself lacked and
were and only asked them to allay his grief.
said he, “but the health of our Sovereign, that good, enchanting, and

of international relations, conquests, and alliances, the historians are
first thought of this filled her heart with gladness.
here.”
done at Mozháysk after the battle of Borodinó.
“All right,” said Pierre, still smiling in the same way. A feeling
when they played some tricks on a policeman, didn’t they do it




The marshals and generals, who were nearer to the field of battle
aerial living sound, the only reply is a disconnected buzzing from



bridge he saw two unlimbered guns, the infantry crossing the bridge,
applied himself to the bottle of Bordeaux. He wrapped the bottle up
movement of the locomotive in the pressure of steam in the boiler, he
frankly, I don’t want to. I am speaking of the staff in general.”
sun, and the songs of the cavalrymen vividly recurred to his mind.
“There is still time, my dear. You must remember, Catiche, that it was
not do and that he had to be quiet.
look, said something to his coachman, and his horses increased their
in relation to everything coexisting with him. This is what makes it
everywhere. We have an excellent priest, he conducts the service
The countess looked round several times at her daughter’s softened face
putting on his spectacles he began reading. Only now in the stillness of
needs fresh air should remain at home,” he would add with extreme
still to get dressed and they had to call at the Taurida Gardens.
chiefly belonged, including, Pierre thought, Joseph Alexéevich himself,
of ecclesiastical, patriotic eloquence. Prince Vasíli himself, famed for
explanation.

to accept their services. He took the glove in silence from the
passing three houses, turned into a yard on the right.
its habitual calm and firm appearance.
of affairs in the Russian army, but no one anticipated any danger of

his mother thought she loved him more, much more, than all her other
Life was cheaper because it was circumscribed: that most expensive
if considering in how far the thing was possible—replied in the

to me fully the meaning of the Great Square of creation and pointed out
orders to let him do so.
singing songs....”
all the wrongs she had done him. When they prayed for those who love us,

“I can’t tell you, I don’t know. No one’s to blame,” said
there only to witness the execution. With ever-growing horror, and no
Emperor, though he met him twice, did not favor him with a single word.
only lit fires to deceive us.
having lost a single man. The second squadron that had been in the front
respectfully.
rags, with pale cheeks, compressed lips, and knitted brows, held on to
CHAPTER XI
in his mind an unsettled question he always tried to stifle, one about


Vienna. Kutúzov with his transport had still to march for some days
“So I can fire when I like!” said Pierre, and at the word
“And, if your excellency will allow me to express my opinion,” he
Lopukhín and the old general occasionally took part in the
all the same?” she thought, and did not reply.
teeth gleamed, brows frowned, ever the same words of abuse flew from
abandoned since her marriage. At the rare moments when the old fire
thinking of?” she went on, turning to Prince Hippolyte. “Fetch me my
planed, and mended boots. He was always busy, and only at night allowed

Pierre most of all was the view of the battlefield itself, of Borodinó
The old lady’s condition was understood by the whole household though no

    * “If you regard the question from that point of view.”
calamity! What a calamity!”
tone of entreaty and reproach that a carpenter uses to a gentleman who
“Who?”
voice calling him by name.
and thence again beyond Drissa, drawing near to the frontier of Russia
together with the latest of Vasíli Lvóvich Púshkin’s bouts rimés.
next morning, was unable to rest and leaped up. The pack on leash rushed

the connection between those men and the nations has not been found.


lathe?” asked Prince Andrew with a scarcely perceptible smile which

a man who on a hot day takes a final run before plunging into the water.
clinking of spurs were heard at the door, and the young count, handsome,
Sónya went out into the passage to go to the barn. Nicholas went
with a bashful and awkward gesture not at all like a military salute
talk, but I don’t want to,” he seemed to say. Besides this, in his
Mikháylovna, or you will not hold out.”
that she understood, and this seemed to make her love for him still
“And are you building?”
is nice. He is very nice, and I love him like a son. But what then?...

the fourth was Nicholas’ own with a short shaggy black shaft horse.
of my nation.” But he continued to exert all his powers to restrain his
unpleasant things to everyone and upset them. Let’s go to the
of my youth, farewell!” he said, turning to Makárin and the others.
secretly married (as Pierre knew), and should be so in love with him as
felty winter hair.
Toll, and others again to Alexander himself—pointing to notes, projects,
to book. Let them twy me, I’m not afwaid of anyone. I’ve served
a ceremonial march past him, and Rostóv on Bedouin, recently purchased
the little princess, kissing her. “I know you already through my
“Yes, Father, I have come to you and brought my wife who is
procured. After swallowing a little she had been so frightened that she


papers and it was the first time he had heard Villeneuve’s name.
thought. “He had always thought what he said then.” And she recalled in
much food and fresh troops awaited them in Smolénsk, nor that they were
These three groups traveling together—the cavalry stores, the convoy of

If the purpose of history be to give a description of the movement of

“What would it cost you to say a word to the Emperor, and then he
retreating straight back from the invaders, deviated from that direct
priests; “all we relatives have been in such anxiety. This young


how he had that day seen Kutúzov, the newly chosen chief of the

breaking off of her engagement to Prince Andrew (which they explained by
sounds of falling drops and the munching of the horses near by, could be
arm and stepping back from the door.
was now a rich man who had risen to high honors and no longer sought
what is bad and what is good in history: some people regard giving a
room.
“But for God’s sake, be careful, you know how it may affect your
in that happy mood in which everything seems possible and everything
dark chamber. I caught myself harboring a feeling of hatred toward him

The old prince said that if he was ill it was only because of Princess
    CHAPTER XXI

At the first sound of trampling hoofs and shouting, Pétya lashed his
was threateningly repeated and he heard the click of the man’s musket as
marshal. An hour later a squad of soldiers arrived and Pierre with
by Divine Providence,” he continued, raising to heaven his fine eyes
come in a large crowd to the barn and sent word that they would not let

The serfs all dispersed. “Uncle” lifted Natásha off her horse and
Count Ilyá Rostóv separately, as the organizer of the banquet. At that
“Give him a seat,” said Túshin. “Lay a cloak for him to sit on,

BOOK FIFTEEN: 1812 - 13
her look of gentle indifference to everything around.
they were ready to go to all lengths—which found expression in the tones

In 1806 the old prince was made one of the eight commanders in chief
“You at least must tackle him properly, or else if he goes on like
nothing! I,’ he says, ‘did that deed, and I put the knife under your
latter threw up his arms in surprise saying it was nowhere to be found
who stood in the midst of the group, without a coat, and with his fine
the smell of linstocks, came the artillery which crawled between the
direction toward the valley and disappearing one after another into
But Pierre thought it necessary to ask: “How is...” and hesitated,
The Englishman took out his purse and began counting out the money.
On the twelfth of November, Kutúzov’s active army, in camp before
business-like seriousness—leaving home for a month, or even two, with
“To attain this end we must secure a preponderance of virtue over vice
wealthy heiress and also by the fact that the older she grew the less
indefinite feeling of shame and awkwardness. The conversations he heard
mind. This day the horrible appearance of the battlefield overcame


said Bolkhovítinov, unable to see in the dark who was speaking but


here. You may be better off than we others,” said Pierre.
“La balance y est... * A German knows how to skin a flint, as the
“Is she like him?” thought Natásha. “Yes, like and yet not like. But she
went about the rooms fashionably dressed but looking sad and dull. Here,
the most skillful strategist could hardly have devised any series
could be heard. Others turned over and warmed themselves, now and again
The postmaster, his wife, the valet, and a peasant woman selling
the cannon balls and shells all flew overhead, but sometimes several men

their coming to Petersburg, and the likeness between Natásha and Prince
we’ll set off.”

see this, but on the Russian side every effort was made to hinder the
the kind in Russia. On other estates the serfs’ compulsory labor was
The French who had been pursuing him stopped.
of which it attracts mercury, seizes it, holds it, and in combination
    CHAPTER XXVIII
Having finished his second glass of punch, Napoleon went to rest before
him.
melancholy upon them, planned the arrangements of a splendid house in
“Well, it doesn’t matter,” said Prince Andrew. “Tell Countess Rostóva
near Vyázma could not resist their desire to cut off and break up two

“He’s with the army, Father, at Smolénsk.”
that all was now over. The terrified wolf pressed back her ears and
columns, their bayonets glittering, were moving continuously in one

panic and less gossip,” ran the broadsheet “but I will stake my life on
vividly imagined what awaited it and the part he would have to
Pétya so as not to let him go again, but always get him appointed to
repeat what they had already told her many times: that so-and-so was
one and again became separate and again blended, now into solemn church
division of continuous motion into discontinuous elements. There is a



“Count Rostóv asks you to come to dinner today,” said he, after a
laughed loudly at it.
“Coming, friend.”
does it! We never hear a word but Dólokhov is mentioned. They swear
glanced at her there was not the least shadow of a smile: only her eyes
to remorse troubled her when she thought of her visit. Though she had
this so strongly that the outward and terrible side of death did not
not consecutive and clear but only the feeling that prompted them.
thrown the reins of the snaffle bridle over the horse’s head. It was
Platón’s whole figure—in a French overcoat girdled with a cord, a
that effort, and the flame of battle burned slowly out.

The “man of great merit,” despite his desire to obtain the post of
excellency... I had no men... your excellency.”
Napoleon might fight him with his own weapon and remain in Moscow
“Borís doesn’t want to help me and I don’t want to ask him.

passage on the bare floor, lay a sick man, probably a Cossack to judge
leather cushion and seeing nothing but that cushion, and her confused
little children failed to understand this and avoided her.
frightened lest she should be in the way and tried to find excuses for

Andrew?’ I did indeed.” She laughed. “He is so well received
kindly, smiling, handsome face and moist eyes. Nesvítski could hardly
and his friend’s. He tried equally to avoid thinking about his wife,
western forces push toward the east several times in 1805, 1806, 1807,
sleepiness that kept coming over him. An enormous space, with our
because of me.’ So he confessed and it was all written down and the
Denísov patted him on the shoulder and began rapidly pacing the room
Pétya. “Vasílich told me. I consider...”
cotillion, having completed one of the figures, Natásha, still out of
who recognized him and said a few words to him, disjointed and awkward,
never reach absolute inevitability.

“I wished to get a nap, mon cousin, but I can’t.”
After a while “Uncle” came in, in a Cossack coat, blue trousers, and
moment!”
along to the colonel,’ I said. He starts yelling, and suddenly there
Bilíbin attentively examined his nails, and many of those present
even Napoleon, could say anything against that truth which they all
and emotion, as if justifying themselves: “Well, whatever he may have
CHAPTER XIII
the priest whose home it was, and that she intended to offer his Serene
faces—that of fear. Prince Andrew for the second time asked the
“not a spire at all, but only an old German ruin.”


Rhetor’s instructions. The Mason drew the shirt back from Pierre’s
imagined, but worse, much worse, than anybody else in the world. But
the Emperor, and a thousand reasons occurred to him why it would be

run to the gate and hit the cow on the head. The only thing to be said
to her.
“I don’t like those fashionable churches,” she said, evidently
“Why?” asked Julie. “You don’t think Moscow is in danger?”
    CHAPTER X
than that. We took Vienna, Berlin, Madrid, Naples, Rome, Warsaw, all
Bagratión alone is a military man. He’s stupid, but he has experience,
his being alone and despondent! A strange face may seem unpleasant or
“Take off your cap... your caps!” These words went from one to another
The general had a fit of coughing as a result of shouting and of the
“But why didn’t you tell me, Drónushka? Isn’t it possible to help them?

answers to these questions, as was only too evident, did not interest
Just as Borís’ leave of absence was expiring, Anatole Kurágin made
   Ah lost, quite lost... is my head so keen,
Russians at Borodinó. The French invaders, like an infuriated animal
acquainted with Prince Andrew Bolkónski, through whom he hoped to


her. The count was more perturbed than ever by the condition of his
amiabilities to Mademoiselle Bourienne.
outside his uniform.
boyars.


Dólokhov—now an officer—wounded in the arm, and on foot, with
Austerlitz to the year 1813. At Austerlitz he remained last at the
playing chess. Berg held a smoking pipe between his knees. Borís, in
Balashëv went into a small reception room, one door of which led into a

And the countess bent over her reticule to hide her agitated face. Sónya



Berg was satisfied and happy. The smile of pleasure never left his face.
Natásha told her that at first there had been danger from his feverish


spirit. She went to bed later and rose earlier than any of them, and
considerations concerning the terms of the anticipated peace.
would I not give now to be unmarried! You are the first and only one to
grave, moment I did not tell you the whole truth. I think there is no
room and we shall have to go down, and you have not smartened yourself
with an audience.
a red face was dancing the trepák with much spirit and agility.
the old prince had shouted that he did not wish to see them, that

show her over, and they’ll talk nineteen to the dozen. That’s
“Thank God that I can,” replied Prince Andrew. “I am very sorry you


Next day the old count called his son aside and, with an embarrassed
not a logical answer and not at all a reply to them. The answer was:
which an enormous map of the environs of Brünn was spread out.
returned to their owners that day.
“On the contrary,” he said, in a querulous and angry tone that
The countess was a woman of about forty-five, with a thin Oriental type
She told him about her romance with Prince Andrew and of his visit to
at dinner and all that evening Natásha was in a strange and unnatural
Seeing, on the other side, some Cossacks (les Cosaques) and the
“No, on my word it’s not obstinacy! I can’t describe the feeling.
and appeal, which he would obtain from Count Rostopchín.

    CHAPTER III
Prince Andrew listened to the account of the opening of the Council of
Chichagóv, one of the most zealous “cutters-off” and “breakers-up,” who



possessed of a Helen. “But no doubt it always is and must be so!”
    * “Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood.”
     you.”

forced him to marry his daughter. Anatole had very soon abandoned his
pet them a bit,” said Márya Dmítrievna, touching her goddaughter and
the sick and wounded lay in two rows with their heads to the walls, and
Borodinó. They were accompanied by a doctor, Prince Andrew’s valet, his
It was long since the Rostóvs had news of Nicholas. Not till midwinter

It was long since Rostóv had felt such enjoyment from music as he

Beausset’s face and he glided away to the other generals.
Bagratión as he shouted, with an expression that seemed to say: “We

was suddenly heard from both sides. The corporal frowned at Pierre’s


“What has Speránski to do with the army regulations?” asked Prince
indicating a captive French dragoon who was being brought in on foot by
With the help of a footman Tíkhon brought in the bedstead and began
not seem to him slower than an awakening from sleep compared to the

the battlefield.
the visitors, and before the visitors I tell you that in future you are
your sorrow, and that for you I am not a Serene Highness, nor a prince,

that you were Parisian! You have that... I don’t know what, that...” and
important old lady dismissed Nicholas after repeating her invitation to

left him; but whether he was still alive, whether he was strong and
“Aren’t you ready? It is nearly ten,” came the countess’ voice.

of men migrated, were impoverished, or were enriched, and millions
went on to say that he knew her parents would not give her to him—for
     * (2) “Of a charming woman, as witty as she is lovely.”
go to. All orders as to where and when to move the guns, when to send
the knoll.



kidnap.... Don’t you understand that it is as mean as beating an old man
protector and defender, she did not answer him, but after dinner called

“It is not at all what you suppose; but that is what the German
us, somebody,” she muttered between her sobs. “My girl... My daughter!
decrease in the strength of the nation—even though it is unintelligible

wishes; that is my only reason for being here. I came simply to help him
considering what impression his words would make on Natásha. He did
Prince Andrew without lifting his eyes rode hastily away from the
If he did not at once give his consent to a reunion with his wife, it

despite the general’s presence were talking loudly and gesticulating.
Buonapartes. But I warn you, if you don’t tell me that this means war,


and sniffing at her singed hair. The woman’s husband, a short,
stood the carts ready corded. The carriages were at the front porch.
was still, warm, and silent. Occasionally the whistle of a huntsman,
swaying to and fro and muttering something, was choking with sobs. Two

him with particular warmth and the Emperor, with his head bent to the

All the plans Pierre had attempted on his estates—and constantly


fallen had not a soldier standing by held him up.
advancing to attack the French cavalry that was coming to meet them.
The regiment broke up into companies, which went to their appointed
d’affaires.

is only by his efforts that the whole population under his rule is
“We drove them back!” said Borís with animation, growing talkative.
their service had lost more horses than the money he had from them would


little drummer boy had been taken alive, and as he was a straggler he
The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.

Dólokhov began laughing.
hand begins to brandish it. Then let us imagine that the combatant who
But though they all realized that it was necessary to get away, there
but remained in deserted Moscow ever in the same state of agitation,

be laughing a little on one side of his face under his gray mustaches,
miniature portrait of her son on the lid of a snuffbox, while the tears
whom he now found nothing in common. “We will go after dinner. And
word of command the expression of cheerful serenity on the faces of
indispensable soldiers to give to the French who, though not harmful, or
Natásha was suffering from, as no disease suffered by a live man can be
a soldier, Aunt, I don’t force myself on anyone or refuse anything,” he
“No, but why do you think so?” Pierre suddenly began, lowering his

When Natásha left the room Pierre’s confusion and awkwardness
Nicholas arrived at the governor’s rather late, but with the phrase
The farther forward and nearer the enemy he went, the more orderly and
against whom he stumbled, seized his thin neck with his hands and,
had recourse to his new judge was when a French prisoner, a colonel,
Sónya, realizing for the first time how wrongly she had acted toward
remembered that, two days before, that man had burned his shirt while
had persisted in his request to Kutúzov, arrived at Grunth and reported
had, or had not, a hundred and thirty inferior fire engines. Deserted
at this moment I were asked: ‘Would you rather be what you were before
the accuracy of his theory.
“Speak quicker, quicker! Don’t torture me!” Kutúzov interrupted him.
countryside—“See, our infantrymen have already got there. Look there

On entering the ballroom the regular hum of voices, footsteps, and
his door, which creaked slightly when opened.
idea of the means by which our holy Order will help you to reach your
death was so certain that soldiers suffering from fever, or the swelling
into the room. He opened the casement. The night was fresh, bright, and

activity of all those who opposed the tendency that then prevailed in
hussars, flushing and addressing an adjutant who had ridden up, “so


again. I must go there, Prince, and scare them a bit. It won’t take a
“You speak to the colonel about this nasty business before other
listened to their talk with a serious and thoughtful air, and then got
The old man was silent.
At the end of the meeting the Grand Master with irony and ill-will

During the whole of that period Napoleon, who seems to us to have been
back to the Emperor retired two steps, twitching off the cloth at the
place! We passed close to the park and saw two deer... and what a
following passage, in German, from the Archduke Ferdinand’s letter:
He called the most important generals to him.
“Yes, one must harness, it is time to harness.”
said she. “One hears such improbable wonders about you.”

Moscow and of a leaflet in circulation stating that Napoleon promised
“Of course she will!” whispered Natásha, but did not finish...
Rostóv’s eyes with the same veiled look. Each time this happened
strength to the utmost and could not have done more without destroying
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
Krásnoe and Orshá.
and at the beginning of August showed that they expected this. Those who
of love and happiness with her! Oh, what a boy I was!” he said aloud
the enemy’s armies will be in a day’s time, and no one can gauge the
Pierre continued, in French, to persuade the officer not to hold that
what was taking place. There for several hours amid incessant cannon and

On his way home from Vorontsóvo, as he was passing the Bolótnoe Place
peculiar glow that came into Prince Andrew’s eyes and by his silence,
principles in harmony with the spirit of the times, undertake the
and Princess Mary’s helpless attempts to protect them were their

to say and begged to be restored to his favor. To this letter the old
prisoners if they surrender according to the rules of strategy and
But behind the veil of smoke the sun was still high, and in front and

for war cannot be conducted successfully without unity of command, and
guided only by their private interests, and they were the very people
and all you have been doing on your estates.”
they made a dash for the Kalúga road, and (after a victory—for at
part in the Austrian campaign and the reasons why he had declined them.

path, Miss. Only, don’t look back.”
The Council of War began to assemble at two in the afternoon in the

grain is good and one sometimes hears that, too.”
    CHAPTER XXXVI
she should not speak French so much. It’s not the time for it now.”

your position is a bad one. You offer me negotiations! But what is the

err, and in nothing more than in what they consider right and wrong.”
of peoples took place in consequence of such and such geographic,
of treating historical material, merely deprives himself of the one
“Devil take all these peasants, and money matters, and carryings
was covered with perspiration. Pierre was hungry and shared the dinner
run away. And next day, Count Ilyá Rostóv—though he had not yet quite
“I should like to speak well of them, but as far as I know the facts,
chattering voices had reached her from the corridor, went into Princess
adjutant, Zherkóv, an orderly officer, the staff officer on duty,
whole life, and he impatiently sought everywhere for signs of that
their rushing and galloping at one another did little harm, the harm of
wrists visible from under the shirt cuffs, laid down the pack and took

and suddenly determines to speak out.
line (the Guards) was already in action.
happened, he was said to be insanely jealous and subject like his
“But a very kind man, Prince,” said Anna Mikháylovna with a

some concessions. Continuing to represent the liberation of the serfs
things were going in the army, the rumors of the discovery of spies in
times parts of the Pávlograd regiment had exchanged shots with
to Napoleon in 1806? Was the will of the Russian people transferred

after his reception by the Austrians, to speak if not in Russian
some in ambition, some in cards, some in framing laws, some in women,
the seat the old prince used to like to sit on, and beside him strips of
alighted from his horse and whose big body was jammed against the

Dólokhov, the bottle of rum still in his hand, jumped onto the window

it and the collective will of all the other animals is vested in that
dismissed from here; therefore, you can stay and go with us wherever our
small bells, their runners squeaking and whistling over the frozen snow,
Pierre looked round. Borís Drubetskóy, brushing his knees with his hand
yard. Sónya, owing to the count’s contradictory orders, lost her head

toward Nicholas came the crunching, whistling sound of Sónya’s feet
could not bear her look but turned away with a sob.
Bolkónski, wishing to profit by his friendliness and obtain for himself
from Sónya freed him from the knot that fettered him and from which
fell into line. The masters rode together. “Uncle,” Rostóv, and
It needs no critical exertion to reduce utterly to dust any deductions
in this way toward an understanding of the laws of history; but it is
miss any chance to do something really heroic. He was highly delighted
also entering the regiment. On returning home Pétya announced resolutely
Having entered his study Pierre closed the door and addressed Anatole
the people, and of his coming himself from the army to Moscow. And as
As soon as it rose everyone in the boxes and stalls became silent, and
and still the same and in the same place. No, it can’t be! Surely it

understand it; I don’t in the least understand why men can’t live
CHAPTER XXXVIII
engaging the cogwheels.
preoccupied and gloomy. From all this talk he saw only one thing: that
to pass the time.”
“Ah, money, Count, money! How much sorrow it causes in the world,”
and he applied for advice to the holy brethren of the Society of Jesus,


drowning, that the mother was hungry, that the soldier was in the ranks,
“Wait a bit, he is not drunk yet! A bottle here,” said Anatole, and

whisper, “has compromised her completely, they say. Pierre took him
Russia, say to our being so frightened, and why are we abandoning our
the middle of a field without rhyme or reason. It’s all those damned
“Doesn’t he? But I didn’t invent it myself.”
indicating a handsome officer of the Horse Guards who passed by them
at us....”
disadvantage of what pleased the sovereign.
After long hesitations, doubts, and prayers, Princess Mary gave the
her foot—which everyone appreciated in view of her size and habitual
The chief reason for devoting no time either to singing, to dress, or
to the left. Now what are you dawdling for?” she cried to the maids.
countess!”
but Prince Andrew interrupted her by answering her intended question,
secretary rather than commander in the army. My removal from the army
attention of all to Borís’ narrative was shown by Hélène. She asked
“Yes, sire, and Moscow is now in ashes. I left it all in flames,”
on the top of her head (a style that quite altered and spoiled her

Tíkhon, at her husband, and at the footman who accompanied them.

Pierre could not go on. He gulped and turned away.
off... and then everything... So you see... I never told this to anyone
house in Vílna from which Alexander had dispatched him on his mission.
how things would be after his death, and how her new, liberated life
accustomed to do everything accurately and not just anyhow, and that he
recognition of the possibility of everyone thinking, feeling, and seeing
general historian looks for the cause of the event not in the power
and there too sat the members of the family, and Pierre and Hélène,
“Humbug! Nonsense! Humbug, humbug, humbug!” cried Prince Bolkónski,
“Well, then, you know,” Nicholas went on, growing hot at the mere
melody that unexpectedly came to his mind seemed to him particularly
by Genlis and the French proverbs, and because his voice shook when he
part in, and for the first time in his life the possibility of death
the Emperor about him; so that in the case of his death—and he is
Princess Mary listened attentively to what he told her.
our thoughts to the second, Bonaparte. But as it turns out, just at
frightened the beast, and it rushed forward onto the hunter’s gun,
right have we to argue? We cannot comprehend either the Emperor’s aims
the first and last time in her life.
stood at the back, and, though he had heard hardly anything, understood

afterwards acquired, he could not have had a better or more profound
excitement at being grown-up and in a perpetual ecstatic hurry not to
the children of the peasants and household serfs.
of which taken separately may seem to be the cause, he snatches at the
regiment, saying he was not such a fool as to slave at the front when he

dislodge them for lack of troops, the men are running away and it is
commit crime, die, or perform deeds of highest heroism, and so he could
the princess noticed all that was going on around her and felt the

A soldier on the march is hemmed in and borne along by his regiment as
execrable, yet to him is entrusted the fate of our whole country.... I
between himself and that lofty infinite sky with the clouds flying over

price. The tone of the proclamation was not as jocose as in the former
he already commanded the squadron he had taken over from Denísov.

on, turning to Dólokhov. “Will you believe it, Theodore Iványch,
wheels and working the screws himself.
inevitable pain showed itself.
dust from the sleeve of his uniform, and going up to a mirror examined
Bald Hills with sixteen horses and dozens of servants and stayed for
of people formed and dissolved, the coming formation and dissolution of
It was by now late in the afternoon. Half the street was in shadow, the
sleeve and, saying that she wanted to have a talk with him, led him to
bathhouse, a lodge, and a large brick house with semicircular façade
of it. If the whole activity of the leaders serves as the expression of
only what was limited, petty, commonplace, and senseless. He had
does not know what to decide on, and time passes bringing no result.
After Denísov’s departure, Rostóv spent another fortnight in Moscow,

Denísov, to Rostóv’s surprise, appeared in the drawing room with

thought this, but still sat in the same place. A strange feeling of

“There’s someone coming,” said he.

times in succession and march as if on parade. Fine fellows! Our King of
Lelorgne d’Ideville, an interpreter, he overtook Napoleon at a gallop
was associated in her mind with the ruin of Russia. She was agitated and
to him to bring several batteries of artillery up to those heights to


ordinary things. He wrote letters to his daughters and to Madame de

He surprised me by asking whether I remembered the threefold aim of
term then also there could have been no war. Nor could there have been
Though they were all going with him, Anatole evidently wished to make
He smiled and held out his hand to her.
the satisfaction of one’s needs and consequent freedom in the choice of
poisoned the artificial tranquillity which he managed to obtain in
BOOK FIVE: 1806 - 07
“It is for the reasson, my goot sir,” said he, speaking with a
still had no news from Dólokhov and the man sent to capture a “tongue”
“I make bold to inform your honor that the rude peasants here don’t
“Or are you afraid to play with me?” Dólokhov now asked as if
everything!” (He put one arm around Pierre and the other around his
and, flushed and smiling, plumped down on the floor. The countess was
aides-de-camp to inquire after the count’s health, came himself
saw—covered to the waist by a bright green quilt—the familiar,


be there. His having moved his troops there is only a ruse; he will
entering the house occupied by Kutúzov, asked for Bolkónski. Prince
was safe from Cossacks.
made preparations for the journey to Moscow.
the Emperor’s wish, not a military council (the Emperor preferred
on the lazy, the depraved, and the weak, and tried to get them expelled
screen before the choir on the left side, and a feeling, new to her, of

of you! Well, thank God. Now lie down. We can still get a nap before
are budding, and really every spring cold winds do blow when the oak
Prince Andrew. They had known each other previously in Petersburg, but
considers his action after twenty years have elapsed than to one who

“You picked it up?... I dare say! You’re very smart!” one of them
tuft of plumes in his cocked hat worn on one side with its corners front
pursuits, hasten from one side of Europe to the other, plunder and
The Mason cleared his throat huskily, as old men do, and called his
    CHAPTER XV
Not expecting to come on the enemy down by the stream, and having
time. Sónya alone directed the practical side of matters by getting

realized his danger, laid back his ears and rushed off headlong. He had

children who were with the French transport, all—carried on by vis
looked at her. “You’re here?” he seemed to be saying, and again lazily
Balagá was about to leave the room.
abominable, quite abominable!” said Prince Andrew, and he went off to
CHAPTER XVI
for whom he longed appear before him and, having pressed her hand to his
written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the
the Russian troops. At the end of the report the general put before
now we shall get anything we want from his hothouses. I have to see him
a battalion of the French Guards to the Preobrazhénsk battalion. The
“Yes, my dear, this is a great loss for us all, not to speak of you.
Natásha to sing.
Frenchman laid his hands on her head and, as she herself afterward
French and the Allies, began to reign. And Napoleon, shedding tears

and obtained that manner which the pas de châle * would, one would have
and so it is possible to find some connection between the intellectual
adapting her in his imagination to all the conditions of married life:
frighten me... You’ve seen the princess? Is it true she’s in love with
In a day or two we shall all have to take part in a greater and more
only conditionally on carrying out the program that the will of the
away with them. Sventsyáni was remembered by the hussars only as the
On receiving this dispatch the Emperor sent Prince Volkónski to Kutúzov

everything in his own way.

the one below. Natásha jumped on it, sank into the feather bed, rolled
Prince Bolkónski sat down in his usual place in the corner of the sofa
    CHAPTER XV
to be heard.
“I see someone with a mustache,” said Natásha, seeing her own face.
merrily to everyone at once, sat down and gaily arranged herself in her


or in human affairs, but were exclusively occupied with the mystical
the Rostóvs since the day of his departure for the army. To be in Anna
correlation of cause and effect in people’s actions, their actions
kindly folk and form the best possible setting for this strikingly
it, and laughed at Dessalles when he mentioned it at dinner.
was at home last, and, having assured himself that they had not, he

ready to use its strength in case their movement stopped.
“But it’s impossible...” declared the gentlemen of the suite, shrugging
Rostóv.
band struck up in the gallery, and the guests settled down in their
“Why don’t you want to go? I promise to house and feed you, while here
of humanity went on as unceasingly as the flow of time. Various groups
involuntarily describe it as resulting from an exercise of power—and say
would be for astronomy.
there he could see churches that had not been burned. The Krémlin, which
negative concept of not doing what is blameworthy or it is a source of

“But what did you want?” cried Márya Dmítrievna, growing angry again.
as he pointed at the old men with his free hand.
in the way. The senior officer moved with big, rapid strides from one

“Why shouldn’t I speak? I can speak as I like, and I tell you
Pierre quickly took out his purse and watch, but could not manage for
soon as he sank into his place on the sofa after two bottles of Margaux
with them, giving final orders to the adjutant. After they had gone
depth of his heart. In one place the peasants presented him with bread
They looked at each other with dismayed and embarrassed faces. He tried
it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this

to her mother.

can rush off alone in a carriage to Moscow, to Petersburg, to those
At eleven o’clock they brought him news that the flèches captured by the
circumstances I may be placed. But if you want to know the truth... if
give them strength to move on and endure their present privations. So
might find in the Russian Empire by sticking a pin into the map at

for him to think that anything disgraceful had happened to his beloved
his request to her to prepare his father for it had not been carried
Having ridden up the road, on both sides of which French talk could be
being only two miles off the Smolénsk highroad. During the last three
I myself have experienced ... and so ... because ... No, excuse me!
in comparison with eternity?”
to happen? Everyone has left Moscow and the people are rioting. How is
     * (2) “Come in, come in.”
glad my brother has found happiness....”
“And you’re still the same diplomatist! But that’s not the

green plums they had dropped.
estate near Moscow, and to receive many people who formerly did not
What sort of governors are they to do that? They ought to be hanged—the
attack would be ruined by the absence of those two regiments, which



Princess Mary could not understand the boldness of her brother’s
“Lavwúska!” he shouted loudly and angrily, “take it off,
French go to Mexico. The King of Prussia and Bismarck issue decrees and


“Hurrah!” rang the enthusiastic voices of the officers.
It was no longer, as before, a dark, unseen river flowing through the
“You don’t understand?” shouted the prince, “but I do! French
as in their simplicity some historians think who say that the leading

“Well, good-by, your excellency, keep well!” said Rostopchín,
in actions that follows from the consciousness of freedom? That is a
memory from that realm of pure and loving childhood presented itself to
grenadiers were splendid, by heaven! I saw them close up their ranks six
Like all the others near the speaker, Prince Andrew looked at him with
Contrary to the Emperor’s wish Kutúzov detained the greater part of the
white foam from his bit, tramping the planks of the bridge with his
the curtain was slowly drawn, and from behind it a soft mysterious voice

who had sheltered in the village houses. They all rushed out of
she, who till then had not shown any alarm, said that she would die of
of my fatherland.
The silence began to oppress the princess and she tried to catch
and pressed together a bunch of raveled lint with her thin, beringed
Pointing to the French troops, Denísov asked him what these and those
violence to the inhabitants or any looting, and announcing a roll call
The hall porter sullenly pulled a bell that rang upstairs, and turned
showed to the soldiers by pressing nails into the walls of the hut; his
from understanding—how am I to put it?—I am afraid my way of looking
follows that Pierre will not be Pierre but will become Count Bezúkhov,
Prince Andrew, recalling his father’s letter. “Yes, we have gained
too seemed strange; at one moment they looked impudently sly and at the

time is infinite, and so in this respect too there can never be absolute
retreat, retaining in our hands an important part of the provinces now
    CHAPTER XVIII
He felt that at a single word from that man all this vast mass (and he


the countess in vague general terms, avoided talking with her and

conversation.
support me in the path of virtue. In his presence doubt has no place.





“What next?” the princess interrupted, smiling sardonically and not
Rostóvs and spent the rest of the day there.
nehmen.” *
told him, and said, “Very good!” in a tone that seemed to imply that
he asked, turning to Shinshín. “Didn’t he vanish somewhere?”

of life, the arrangement of the day so as to be in time everywhere,
we do not understand.
expressed disapproval of Dólokhov’s living at their house, and how

brother-in-law Bezúkhov to pay off debts he regarded as genuinely due
armies, so that it was as easy for the Russian rearguard to get to it as
this,” cried Prince Andrew in a shrill voice that seemed to escape him
Anatole was with the countess. The countess’ drawing room was full of
lying on piles at the end opposite the entrance, to serve as a table. On
wishing to show her connections and knowledge of what went on in
He wrote from the province of Vorónezh where he had been sent to procure

from that distorted mouth issued an indistinct, hoarse sound. Anna


general expanded his chest and rode, frowning, beside him to the
Intriguer!” she hissed viciously, and tugged with all her might at the
series of commands is also generalized into a single expression of will.
You were not right, not quite in the right, you were impetuous...”

Bilíbin), what he had read began to interest him more and more. When he
talking broken Russian to the servants, but was still the same narrowly
Curving her arms, Natásha held out her skirts as dancers do, ran back
confusion, and cross-purposes, fell into a rage to everybody’s surprise
Captain von Toll chanced to ride to the same spot, and seeing the
under whose banner it is very easy to use words having a still less
“Ozheg-zheg, Ozheg-zheg...” hissed the saber against the whetstone,
pitied him. But Uncle Nicholas came nearer and nearer to them. Terror
Morel, a short sturdy Frenchman with inflamed and streaming eyes, was
had said. On hearing that he was going to Petersburg Natásha was
“You mustn’t think we’ll be in anyone’s way, Uncle,” she said.
her eyes off him, and smiling and holding her breath. He gave her a
suddenness and prompt him to the coarsest and most reckless actions.
out of them.”
Emperor’s horse, and the faint creak of a footstep Rostóv knew at
will. But in the Crusades we already see an event occupying its definite
Pierre rose to help him.
a frightened and suffering look resembling that on the thin Frenchman’s

“Bezúkhov.”
eat before going away. He went to a hotel he had noticed that morning.
excellent mother. Oh, my friend! Religion, and religion alone, can—I
“Who do you want?”
messenger was Michaud, a Frenchman who did not know Russian, but who was
he should and doing no wrong. Only he prayed to God for death. Well, one

but which yet aroused involuntary horror in him was drawing near.
halting place and wherever they spent a night, Natásha never left the

Natásha would have had no doubt as to the greatness of Pierre’s idea,



something on which to vent his rage.
After he had returned, voices were heard outside the shed. “Who’s that?”
man whose authority would be willingly recognized, and Bennigsen is the
Sónya wiped away her tears and went up to Natásha, again scanning her
The symptoms of Natásha’s illness were that she ate little, slept
CHAPTER XIII
father and Andrew. I shall be so happy when she is his wife. She is so
way!... Let us pass!... Stop there, you devil with the cart! I’ll hack
simple note with an order from Kutúzov, and received at night, breaking
and comprehensible path, but hoped to do so.
adjutant on duty to take in his name, but received an ironical look and
everywhere, all with the same preoccupied expression and busy with
“Captain Ramballe, of the 13th Light Regiment, Chevalier of the Legion
instant of delay might cost him his life; but he did not know what
her—“Will he ever forgive me? Will he not always have a bitter feeling
Napoleon, with his usual assurance that whatever entered his head was
What am I going to do?” And he immediately gave himself the answer:
gentleman-in-waiting.
Moscow came to the prince’s front door but he gave orders to admit no

ministers, parliaments, or newspapers be imagined? Is there any
The historians call this activity of the historical figures “the
for the first time quite closely, with all its wrinkles and details,
sad and depressed. It was all so strange, so unlike what he had hoped.
moved his forces to attack the center and outflank both the Russian
desperate and agonized terror...”
On the contrary it tormented her more than anything else of late, and
just such a story—they would either not have believed him or, still
ask her what he had been saying, and be vexed if he noticed that she
“Wostóv! Pétya!” exclaimed Denísov, having run through the dispatch.

fellow could have played such a prank on a policeman.
     * “Marlborough is going to the wars; God knows when he’ll

looking with a scared face at his comrade for help. The door, having let
saber which had caught in his cloak. It was an old-fashioned saber of
hussar regiment went and his jealousy had become a standing joke among

     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
He entered the drawing room with his usual alert step, glancing rapidly


But won’t you come to this other table?” repeated Anna Pávlovna.
her life in fear and constant suffering. Mademoiselle Bourienne was

examining, for as soon as there is no freedom there is also no man. And
stood still at the window and listened.
sometimes involuntarily fixed on him. She knew that her going in during
such a small, insignificant creature compared with what was passing now


“Well, do you recognize your little madcap playmate?” asked the
brought his face close to hers.
a victory over Bonaparte, just when I’m not serving. Yes, yes, he’s

do me the favor.”
“On the contrary it’s very interesting!” replied Pierre not quite
people’s belief that this was necessary for the welfare of France, for
hearing him, became still surlier and ruder.
yet. He felt that he must not say it.
smeared with soot for fun nor these women hurrying away nor the burned
room, and Julie, suddenly abandoning her melancholy, became cheerful and
“What about your master?” he asked Lavrúshka, Denísov’s orderly,
a whisper that the prince was sleeping, and hastily closed the door.

front, leaning on a stick and slightly limping. When he had advanced
laughing joyfully and shouting “Hurrah!”

some twenty men of his suite. These gentlemen talked among themselves
taken and after that, with no further battles, it is not Russia that
“I’ll tell you what, my dear fellow,” said Prince Andrew, who


the path of his calèche. Ahead of the rest and nearer to him ran a
“But such a... such a... never happened to me before!” she said.
was in a white uniform rode a black one. These were the two Emperors
me.”
her.
passions; but we must strive to direct them to a noble aim, and it is
women had spread out their linen,” said one of the men, gazing with
as if astonished at the word. “Well, you see, I’m building. I mean
“Confound you and your Karl Ivánich!” He took the glass with the
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full
toward her which she could not overcome.
projectiles that flew over him, did not see the enemy on the other side
Bonaparte was anathematized and in Moscow nothing but the coming war
“Yes, sir.”

going too. Besides, all the same I can’t study now when...” Pétya
no more. She is so affected. Ask her in,” she said to the footman in a
how they had been made much of in Russia, Poland, and abroad. They spoke
“He doesn’t obey... I said it twice... and he doesn’t obey! She
one and the same law (whether he observes the necessity of taking

them rest and leisure?” said Pierre, hurrying and lisping. “And
more and sneered malevolently.
a comrade’s, and rode again to the vanguard to find Milorádovich.
“I am Russian,” he said quickly.
limits of privation a man can endure; but thanks to his physical
Then she slipped down among the flowerpots on the other side of the tubs
figures in history are heroes, that is, men gifted with a special
    CHAPTER I
archduke’s as good as another, as you know) and even if it is only

if the aim of the battle was what actually resulted and what all the
to leave the city, others on the contrary said that all the icons had
room. All were silent.
With a rapid but careful movement Natásha drew nearer to him on her

the infinitely small can now yield solutions in other more complex
would have been the wish to capture army corps of the French, when our
twenty-fifth of August, 1812, did they think that a battle might be
occupied with evening parties, dinners, lunches, and balls, giving him
“Your excellency! Let us attack them! I’ll dwive them off.”
The faces of officers and men brightened up at the sound. Everyone got
Natásha was calmer but no happier. She not merely avoided all external
eyes attracted him irresistibly.
A few intimate friends were dining with the Rostóvs that day, as usual
said to herself. Little Andrew, her eldest boy, imitating his mother,

up their knapsacks with a jerk of their shoulders and pulling the straps
had rushed out from the wood. He saw Karáy seize the wolf, and checked

his eyes and considered.

concern for the safety of the arsenal at Túla, and especially the
the house, Nicholas no longer considered it necessary to show his manly

seemed to hear left... left... left.
by the sun, because it grows heavier, because the wind shakes it, or
nothing to be happy about!” thought he.
“What else did he say to you? What are those verses? Read them...”
“Oh yes, why not? They may,” he said.
“We’ve been told to keep order, and that no one is to leave their homes
o’clock were stationed inactive behind Semënovsk, under heavy artillery
“Mon cher, even in this case you can’t do without Michael

no one knows when? Armfeldt says our army is cut in half, and Paulucci
the proofs he deduced to convince himself that it was not worth stooping
And he narrated his whole conversation with the French doctor and
that it is more dangerous to run away than to advance, but that Russian
His life meanwhile continued as before, with the same infatuations and
listless; she wept secretly at night and did not go to her mother in the
him. She refused to go away and her father’s fury broke over her in a
God. Formerly he had sought Him in aims he set himself. That search for
her eyes filling with tears, and then not for the first time the strange
himself, so that she was not invited to dinners and evening parties. She
But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her.
impulses has remained unknown.
News was received at the Emperor’s quarters that very day of a fresh
tens, will have the following significance:
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
the enchanted circle I cannot escape from. I am now going to the war,
Natásha, who felt her glance, did not look at her. All three were again
resumed its former cold, artificial expression. She returned to the
On returning from a second inspection of the lines, Napoleon remarked:
trifle to let a wagon go past. After he had gone, two soldiers rushed to
reported to him, and then joined the adjutants listening to what the
But to the generals, especially the foreign ones in the Russian army,
slipped behind the others.
Round the peasant’s deal table, on which lay maps, plans, pencils, and

Pierre wished to say something, looked at her with eyes whose strange
In an hour, all the costumes were crumpled and disordered. The corked
rich old man. But before leaving home and undertaking these new affairs,

“But how could one say that in Russian?”
numerous these detachments became.
life, and I see that however much and however carefully I observe the
she hardly heard his voice through the closed doors.

“What is it? What is it?” he asked, but his comrade was already

face on the catafalque, and the encounter he had with Zúbov over her
of Bonaparte, encountering a population that was unfriendly to it,
arrived at their places at the appointed time and destroyed the enemy.
settled by Napoleon’s visit to a mosque, no results were achieved.
“What? Here? But why did they not blow up the bridge, if it was
listening to the sounds and looking in silence at the people.
    CHAPTER IX


youth and his wish to express all that was in his mind.
fascinating and consequently so alarming that he was ready to run away,
emphatically.
to him from the time of his rescue till his illness. He remembered
declare his feelings to Princess Mary. And he knew that he would never

around them cannon balls were flying, of which he was aware not so
cold chill ran down his back.
Moscow after that battle had said unanimously that it was impossible to
imprisonment were such that he seemed not to know what fatigue and
to its utmost limit.
in the world, it seemed to him, depended entirely on his will.

sleepless nights or the hardest tasks had he shown the least fatigue,
“Don’t tease! Well, and what has been decided about Novosíltsev’s
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
the disordered battalion and at the enemy, “what’s that?”
bare arms and neck were not beautiful—compared to Hélène’s her

poorer brothers. I was a merchant, my dear brothers, and had much

December.
ran forward on each such occasion, fearing to miss a single word of the



    CHAPTER XV
But the count had already recovered from his excitement.
“What is it? What’s the matter?”
Pétya was not at home, he had gone to visit a friend with whom he meant
in the bantering tone he habitually adopted toward her, always feeling
He sat in his short overcoat leaning against a birch tree. On his face,
the fire of life had seemed extinguished, now flashed with brilliant
a fictitious but a live character who like every man had his personal

the wax with the baby’s hair had not sunk in the font but had floated.
That evening the Rostóvs went to the Opera, for which Márya
“Why run risks, Captain? You should dismount,” he said.
Drissa fortifications with the Emperor and had pointed out to him that
nearer, faster and louder, louder and faster, a cannon ball, as if it

regiment. The faces of these young people, especially those who were

saw a rather short man. Having evidently come from the light into the
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
room to write to his father, to whom he wrote every day. In the corridor
Between three and four o’clock in the afternoon Prince Andrew, who
“Count Ilyá Rostóv’s son?” asked Dolgorúkov.
to be carried into the hut after his calèche had stopped at Mytíshchi.
“To the fifth gun, wheel it up!” came shouts from one side.

The discussion recommenced, but pauses frequently occurred and they all
CHAPTER I
him.
the circle, then at the corner of the room he caught Hélène’s
just the same position in which Márya Dmítrievna had left her.
(2) What force produces the movement of the nations?
was talked of. For the Rostóv family the whole interest of these
for your work. And lastly you too, peasants, come from the forests where
of August (he considered that it could and should have been defended)
woman who could not understand all that constitutes a man’s dignity,
“I won’t say he is out of sorts, but I fancy he would like to be
Again real events mingled with dreams and again someone, he or another,
Prince Andrew looked up his former acquaintances, particularly those he


feel that in that place and on that day, it was improper to speak so of
He laughed in his usual dry, cold, unpleasant way, with his lips only
to shout: “Blackguards!... Throw the snow back on the road!” did not
took possession of him, and all the unlucky accidents that might destroy
“I never doubted the devotion of the Russian nobles, but today it has
once seemed good, ten years later seems bad, and vice versa. And what is
squadron, that in which Rostóv was serving under Denísov, to return to
and carrying muskets, knapsacks, and enormous sacks, stood in front
just under the icons; his large thick hands outside the quilt. Into the
plainness of speech, uttering the word amant as casually as any other
happy because she had someone to adore her: the adoration of others was

our hearts are united by indissoluble bonds, my heart rebels against

days’ march and the enemy’s outposts after a brief interchange
Pierre knew all the details of the attempt on Bonaparte’s life in 1809
animal. Count Ilyá Rostóv, laughing and repeating the words, “Make
what the Emperor is! It is I, Ramballe, who tell you so.... I assure you
still, with his father’s disapproval they wouldn’t have been happy, and
follows the current of his own thoughts, “things will have gone too
phrases. “Look, Anna Timoféevna,” she added to her companion, “see what
sleeves of his fur cloak threw it on and got into his sleigh.
though it knew that the time of its destruction was near when the
a field of battle they considered impossible to hold? The lower-grade
disengaged herself from the dogs, with tail tucked in again, went
as they entered.
While Mávra Kuzmínichna was running to her room the officer walked about
I am to do; I wanted to consult you seriously.”

not now abstaining from doing so at the first moment when I asked the

right or wrong is he who says that Napoleon went to Moscow because he
and were taking up, or preparing to take up, their positions for the
body so as not to slip out of the ramshackle old vehicle, Pierre,
The larger bell was muffled and the little bells on the harness stuffed
and when everything had been plundered fled farther.
goal—their native land—was too remote, and their immediate goal
called Berthier.
indiscretion, nodded and said: “I hope to see you again, but I also

impatient every day. The thought that her best days, which she would
that humanity calls right or even just, the historians produce a saving
clear, insolent eyes in the general’s face.
    CHAPTER VIII
this, will they let it pass? He, your father, I know him... if he

“We’ll try to,” replied Berg, touching a pawn and then removing

Napoleonic alliance, the circle of Count Rumyántsev and Caulaincourt.
to the left, and among the orange-colored Uhlans on chestnut horses and
     *(2) That suits us down to the ground.

changing into a Polish uniform, he drove to the riverbank in order to
Freedom is the thing examined. Inevitability is what examines. Freedom

unless a prompt remedy is applied the troops will no longer be under
    CONTENTS

Gerásim roused him from his reverie the idea occurred to him of taking
Toll read them to Ermólov, asking him to attend to the further

were tuned to a high pitch and this was too simple and needlessly
gives a report quite contrary to what was said by the officer
he would have approved of is our family life. He was always so anxious
Pultúsk to Petersburg returns bringing our appointment as commander in
Sometimes on his way back from the anteroom he would pass through the

The fog had begun to clear and enemy troops were already dimly visible
King of Prussia what he is to do if he is summoned to surrender.... All

doppelkümmel. The officers gladly gathered round him, some on their
    CHAPTER XX
harm would be done to the inhabitants, and if they remained they would
recognize, she did not even recognize her own daughters, or her late
boldly, with saucy gaiety, confident that her prank would be taken in
round, drew close to Balashëv’s face, and, gesticulating rapidly and


which had disappeared, but at French infantry who had come into the

headquarters was still under the spell of the day’s council, at which

that she did not—but with her pregnancies, her confinements, the nursing
and I am rich.... Yes, that’s the only reason.... Yes, were it not for


from the French, and when his eyes met those of the prisoners they

On Hélène’s name day, a small party of just their own people—as
thirtieth he attacked Mortier’s division, which was on the left bank,
pale face and glittering eyes.
cabman had told her that the people were breaking open the barrels at
CHAPTER XIV
Hélène understood that the question was very simple and easy from


“Forward, lads!” he shouted in a voice piercing as a child’s.
said Repnín.
Dólokhov himself during his convalescence spoke to Rostóv in a way no
to alter it....”
matter with him and remembered being wounded and how was when he asked


be called back to life from that realm of sorrow in which she had dwelt
Bilíbin puckered his skin in preparation for something witty.
I’m fond of it,” said “Uncle.”
that where the steward had shown him in the accounts that the serfs’
and who was one of the disinterested friends so brilliant a woman as


reassured he was that everything would be as it should. “He will not
Your son bids fair to become an officer distinguished by his industry,
“Oh, I really did not mean to hurt her feelings. I understand them so
time to begin a general engagement, withdrew their left wing from the
“Well, you see, Count, I want some money.”
ladies and gentlemen than Rostóv had ever expected to see him.
drying it at the fire and how they had laughed at him.
bwicks and it’s nasty work! An attack’s pleasant work! Hacking
responsibility himself.
believe me,” he went on, growing warmer and beating his chest, “I’ll


movements of the crowd had any sense. So one might have thought that
activity was so unswervingly directed to a single aim; and it would be
as if of its own accord. Toward night candles were burning round his
must ride up.... Shall we both course it?” answered Nicholas, seeing
animation and apprehension, but it seemed to Pierre that the cause of
gold lace glittering in the bright June sunshine.
a given direction the animals transfer their will to the animals that
“I am very glad to see you! Go in there where they are meeting, and wait

“What division are you?” shouted an adjutant, riding up.
bear the whole burden on his shoulders. Fancy what he had to go through!
spoke smilingly and listened with a laugh.

his army; and it looks as if he planned this in order not to come under
as the right flank would probably not be able to withstand the enemy’s
degwaded?... Listen, I’m w’iting to them stwaight. This is what I
But before Pierre could decide what answer he would send, the countess
    * “Long live the king.”
himself knowing whom to or what about. “That’s it, come on! That’s
elopements are like,” continued Dólokhov with a wink. “Why, she’ll rush
because Napoleon wished it and a man who says that this happened because
“If we live we shall see,” replied Bilíbin, his face again becoming
“I like that!” exclaimed Pétya. “Why shouldn’t I go?”

ran forward shading his eyes with his small hand to look at the French.
maintain his powerful position with Alexander, whose own character was

he set to work.
smile was most naïve, cheerful, and good-natured.
breaking something in the master’s apartment, and he hastened to say
feelings, her sufferings, shame, and remorse. He now understood for the
“Yes,” returned Nicholas. “You’re not cold?”
humility.
In the morning all that was left of the night mist on the heights was

against which they had hurt themselves. Ney, who had had a corps of ten

exceeded twenty thousand rubles. Dólokhov was no longer listening to
as a force that itself produces events. Yet in most cases universal
and now... in this cond...”

Borís had realized this the week before when the commander in chief in
On the French side, amid the groups with cannon, a cloud of smoke
against the fence to save himself from falling.
his muscular legs as if sailing along, stretching himself to his full
left the place where the balls and bullets were flying about, their
The hussar only sighed without replying and coughed angrily. The sound
Natásha, who had long expected to be fetched to nurse her baby, now
and cleverness, and knew of something else that would decide the
Next day the countess called Borís aside and had a talk with him, after
any the worse off. In Siberia they lead the same animal life, and the
twenty to thirty rubles received for the most part in promises from a
rapid steps to the village.
the inhabitants of the district.

to seek or plan anything, that his rut had long been shaped, eternally
pensions and the same amount for asylums; 150,000 alimony was sent to
“But in what am I to blame?” she asked herself. And his cold, stern look
domestic serfs begged permission to go to have a look at him. That
sad, but it was a sweet, tender sadness.
soldiers forming the picket line, like showmen exhibiting a curiosity,
of deference also disturbed Pierre. He had suffered so painfully three
before him. The French had advanced nearest on our right. Below the
saw a closed door. Below, under the staircase, was a door leading to the

father’s pardon for herself and for Philip the footman, who had begged
took a great liking to you,” he went on simply and calmly, evidently
succeeds. He sat motionless, looking at the heights visible above
match in Russia, had sunk greatly in the esteem of society after his
upon Prince Andrew, who was beside him. Seeing him, Kutúzov’s
was saying.
something more.
“That’s twue, devil take it!” shouted Denísov, jumping up. “Now
more joyful. Still more and more joyful!” And from an unknown depth rose
though what happened was due to chance and was independent of the
“When loving with human love one may pass from love to hatred, but

Borís inquired what news there might be on the staff, and what, without

to him an obvious truth. “What theory and science is possible about a
all they could to destroy themselves. From the time they turned onto


a moment. The sick man was given something to drink, there was a

more carts and carriages, and the Rostóvs were being shouted at to move

soldier, mimicking the general who had ridden away. “I’d shoot them,

vent to her anger against Anatole in words of abuse, Márya Dmítrievna

besides the look of joyful emotion it had worn yesterday while telling

to Milorádovich who was near him.

feel afraid.”
namesake, the new Count Bezúkhov) “and now she’s in love with that
the mildness of his features, was all the greater. Rostóv was happy
aren’t you? Whose child is it?” they asked him.

sheet. Good-by, my dear friend. May God keep you in His holy and mighty
the harp and to play only the guitar. She asked “Uncle” for his
awakening, she embraced her friend, but noticing Sónya’s look of

The arrangement adopted when they started, that the officer prisoners
the door opened, and Anatole entered, stooping and trying not to brush
now with the Swiss tutor Dessalles, and showing an unnatural animation,
“We all have our weaknesses,” said Kutúzov smiling and walking away
justifications of the collective action that is performed, the less is
one must wait and see, that the malady was chiefly mental, but... And

dressed for his attendance at court in full parade uniform, which he

wonder-working icon of the Holy Mother of God has been revealed.’ On
expressed by all talking at once, and it was so strange that she must
wounds, the loss of family—I fear nothing. And precious and dear
sarcastic smile under which he wished to hide his embarrassment, “to
“Well, that’s all—everything,” said Natásha.
and not in the habit of running, trotted awkwardly stumbling on his
presented itself to him—not in relation to any worldly matter or with


the Karágins’! Please come! No! Really, eh?” said he.
father?”
about his subordinate Pryánichnikov addressed a question to him.


CHAPTER XVI
her work as if to testify that the interest and fascination of the story
me!” Rostóv whispered.
the baggage trains, and the prisoners, hemmed in on all sides, emerged

deliberately.
     fellows. What the devil! There, don’t let us be cross, old


Vasíli in the anteroom. All the affectation of interest she had assumed
she would not be happy. Before Natásha had finished singing,
And as the undefinable essence of the force moving the heavenly bodies,
and comforting thoughts, memories, and imaginings that came to him.
CHAPTER I
Russians to stop this movement, to which the French were directing all
consequently some thought him proud and others thought him stupid. The

loud that those in the drawing room heard her and were startled. “Why


the army, took none of these steps.
Prince Andrew could not have explained how or why it was, but after that
“Sit down with me a little,” said the countess.

even more merrily than on the previous night. Denísov celebrated his
struck one especially in Petersburg as a pleasant surprise, were such
anything from them, often gave them the last of their rations.
“C’est grand!” * say the historians, and there no longer exists either

his present Sónya from whom he had resolved never to be parted again.
instantly dropped them again. All the blood which had seemed congested
already begun to get used in the corridor, was still stronger here. It
words. Touched that this statuesque princess could so change, Pierre
without looking at the man he was addressing, and did not reply to
before the usual term and has proposed to me to be your sponsor. I
seated them on the center sofa. The bigwigs, the most respected members
the better match and how the matter would be regarded at court. There

dressing for his ride, and wore a blue uniform, opening in front over
He disliked having anything to do with the domestic serfs—the “drones”
“Let go, I tell you! I will take the responsibility. I myself will go
The peasant is irrefutable. He has devised a complete explanation. To
“There was a letter from Prince Andrew today,” he said to Princess

winter of 1806, which Nicholas Rostóv spent in Moscow, was one of the
had finished his story someone else was anxious to relate something
Sónya passed to the pantry with a glass in her hand. Natásha glanced

of this set.
another time.”
his head.
“May I go in and look?”

surrounded by the magic plain bathed in moonlight and spangled with
was heard to say. His voice was calm and deliberate. “Moscow it is,
them with his hand.

a little later with greater suffering. Timókhin, the red-nosed major of
Madonna was depicted playing at stick and ball. The ball represented the
excellency,” said Timókhin timidly, and continually turning to glance at
Zavárzinsk thicket the other day! Leaped a fearful place; what a sight
faculty, so invaluable in society, of composure and imperturbable
contemptuous. Everything that reminded him of his past was repugnant to

pretext. The fact is he has come to see Count Cyril Vladímirovich,
On the seventeenth of August Rostóv and Ilyín, accompanied by Lavrúshka


wish that Kurágin should be banished from Moscow. The whole house was in
which Kutúzov afterwards pursued him—this unnecessary retreat along
Pierre, who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened to


a very gloomy frame of mind in a royal study in the Krémlin, giving

old courtier, and by Russians as something indefinite—a sort of puppet
her like some little wild animal. He glanced at her occasionally with a
Borís knew nothing about the Boulogne expedition; he did not read the
uncomprehended, and terrible, was becoming unbearable. Those standing
half-open door of the corridor, intending to conceal himself as soon
“Go!” he cried, twisting the reins round his hands, and the troyka tore
under an invisible cap—to see what went on in the world. She was

making an effort to listen, but could not do so.
She was no longer in the loose gown she generally wore in the morning,
“Oh, very interesting!” said Mademoiselle Bourienne.
bands and two choirs of singers. Rostóv danced the Trepák with Major


Austrian adjutant, Bilíbin, and last night’s conversation. Having
tutor, Prince Andrew again joined warmly in the conversation about
morning, the lines were so near together that the men could see one
in a shovel—the guests who had been scattered about in different rooms


then, suddenly spread out in the sunlight, far-distant objects could
and others like them walking singly across the field shouting and
heard musket fire quite close in front of him and behind our troops,



Pierre rose, rubbed his eyes, and seeing the pistol with an engraved






voice; above all he had never seen such delicate whiteness of face or

he shouted, “and then I shall reserve the right to state my opinion
The search for these laws has long been begun and the new methods of

“You fellows have no conscience,” said he to the valet who was pouring
regiment, devoted himself entirely to the pleasures and interests of
On waking up that morning Count Ilyá Rostóv left his bedroom softly, so
Thus in a time of trouble ever memorable to him after the birth of their
“What is the matter with you, my darling? You look pale. Oh, you
“Mon enfant!” she muttered, “je vous aime et vous connais depuis
to give you the love you do not feel, and your prayer would have been
     With these tears that I feel to be flowing.
of the dip in the ground at the rear was hurried and noisy, but the
accept them as gold, or among those who do not know the nature of
science of history, whose aim is to enable nations and humanity to know
century had been the aggrandizement of Russia, that aim might have been
to set the serfs to work. Say that everything out of the hothouses must
the old interests of her carefree girlish life that had been so full
But Milorádovich was at that moment evidently thinking of anything
the men.

doubt it now. Rostóv rode in the direction pointed out to him, in which




live in society.

he appeared before notre très gracieux souverain * with the news of the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
easy to take marshals, sitting on a sofa by the fire! That is true, but
had been placed on his camp bed he lay for a long time motionless with
“Is it true that Austrians have been beaten?” asked Dólokhov.
would have a dispute, but long afterwards Pierre to his surprise and
increased crowd, dropped behind and returned to his tavern.
as if the minds of these morally exhausted men found relief in everyday,

there—those stockings are to be a surprise for me.”
for his reply, surrounded him, and led him to the drawing room. It was
support of his battery all was forgotten. Prince Andrew listened
He did not see and did not hear how they shot the prisoners who lagged
more settled outlook on practical matters was furnished by his decision
cultivated, and capable of the young men. Forgive my vanity as a
last extremity and to defend it, leaving to the commander in chief’s
That same night, having taken leave of the Minister of War, Bolkónski
there still remained for an instant a faraway dreamy expression remote

expressed it, were sharpening their teeth for it. Two of the commanders

And without waiting for an answer from the sentinel, who had stepped
I tell you Buonaparte was a great tactician? Here, he says the same

descending the valley. That moment of moral hesitation which decides
Till midday on the nineteenth, the activity—the eager talk, running to
“What a darling this Nicholas of mine is!” thought Natásha.
save myself?” he thought. He rode on to the region where the greatest
was true. No one had taken any notice, for everyone knew the sensation

“Yes, but what am I to do?... I try not to show...”
Prince Andrew repeatedly glanced at Natásha, gay and laughing among the
spread a greatcoat on the ground for the sick man, and brought some
could find nothing to reproach them with; but even they had their
Dmítrievna met him and told him that Natásha had been very unwell the

him, he does not know Russian.”
I was to blame for not understanding her, for not understanding that

at leaving home for the first time in his life on bad terms with him,
and light, joyous steps. At the visitors’ request the young people
and ceased talking when Véra entered. Sónya and Natásha looked at
the avenue leading to the house as if he were entering an enchanted,
The coup de théâtre had not come off.
all that goes on in the world and especially about the honors conferred
There is no one in Russian literature now, from schoolboy essayist to
even more so. I like being alone.... Father likes her very much. She and
They say he blushed like a girl to whom Joconde is read, when he said to
proprietor’s goods and packing them on the carts, and Dron, liberated at
Having sat some time at table, Speránski corked a bottle of wine and,
waited for him to go on, but as he seemed quite decided to say no more
up with one’s own life, before whom one was to blame and had hoped to
feeling it necessary to make a sacrifice before abandoning the capital
smiling. “Cela nous convient à merveille.*(2) Suvórov now—he knew
never to blame,” were the last words he heard from his sister when he
place by his will. And so the question whether he had or had not a

herself, and clung to her.
morning or evening than night. On the way Pierre remembered that Anatole


alone with Hélène in the little drawing room where they were sitting.
The Tsar heard but obviously did not like the reply; he shrugged his
immediately.
Anatole followed him with his usual jaunty step but his face betrayed
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
positions and maintaining a hellish fire under which the French army was
to give in money and work all that other people’s serfs gave—that is

cruelly and painfully to the end of his life. He seemed still to hear
a pleasant smile, bowed respectfully. In spite of her exceptional
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
stand the sight of these unfortunates.
“Yes, is there a family free from sorrow now?” said Pierre, addressing
(“Arnauts” was the Tsarévich’s favorite expression when he was in
employ, but those folk sayings which taken without a context seem so
ready so soon?”

“I don’t know. I think if he writes, I will write too,” she said,
set without whom my wife cannot exist, and those women.... If you only
consider himself happy to be acquainted with her, he did not wish to

friends with my little fool, Princess Mary,” he shouted after Pierre,
show, by disregarding the orders, that she did not believe in medical

Pétya, “I consider it so horrid, so abominable, so... I don’t know what.
Dron on the contrary retired to the rear and the crowd drew closer

“Trakh-ta-ta-takh!” came the frequent crackle of musketry, but it was
palms, and smelled their pungent, sweetly bitter scent. Nothing remained
and in place of an intellect (grouping events and drawing conclusions)
Napoleon rode on, dreaming of the Moscow that so appealed to his
streets to the other side of Moscow.
Lavrúshka was one of those coarse, bare-faced lackeys who have seen all
“No, he’s not a fool!” replied Natásha indignantly and seriously.
glasses of wine mechanically into his large mouth he felt a pleasant
knows his job does when turning up his sleeves and putting on his apron

“How do you expect him to answer you all at once?” said Prince
I do not yet know. There will be time enough to think about love when I
in compliance with any particular paper edition.
the staff captain.
him; Denísov, whose curly hair, mustache, and whiskers had turned half
it torments him for nothing. He may already have found a suitable and
of the unwritten code of subordination—looked so fixedly at the
is increased or diminished and the conception of compulsion is
no fresh war could improve the position or add to the glory of Russia,
As far as one can make out, not so much from this unintelligible
readiness to give anything asked of him (he received the allowance
which he began to be conscious. He did not like to agree with him in
that the sun or the earth had a property of attraction; he said that all
Smolénsk was abandoned contrary to the wishes of the Emperor and of the
met the regiment announced that all the huts were full of sick and dead
come intentionally to speak of his love and therefore meant to be


Someone mentioned that Captain Túshin was bivouacking close to the

stir. An adjutant, dismounting, lifted the soldier under the arms to
“But nowhere in Europe is there anything like that,” said Napoleon.
in disorder of late, chiefly because of his first wife’s debts—had begun


moved by fear or vanity, rejoiced or were indignant, reasoned, imagining
move.
back!”
said Pierre. “I should like to start from the Moskvá River and ride
me. ‘Everyone fears a bear,’ he says, ‘but when you see one your
clavichord was. “It’s no use your going to the commander in chief.
disordered. The French cannon did not reach there and the musketry fire

Pierre hesitated.
Pierre could not and did not wish to break this silence.
The old man was already sitting barefoot. The little Frenchman had
toward him with a terrific whizz, and then he shuddered and sat up. He

part. Anna Pávlovna Schérer on the contrary, despite her forty years,
inevitability. In every action we examine we see a certain measure of
her, evidently prepared for the height of joy or misery. She was
and she found them on my table and said she’d show them to Mamma, and
and fuss about an authentic Scotch carpet and a charter that nobody
attitude toward him that had taken place in society.
The Tsar looked intently and observantly into Kutúzov’s eye
questions of health, sometimes in Russian and sometimes in very bad but
“Mamma, I don’t at all want to,” replied Natásha, but all the
Rostopchín had replied that he could not come:
When the Emperor had passed nearly all the regiments, the troops began
invalid chair, a wax taper in his left hand, was leaning his left arm on
The third time the Rhetor came back more quickly and asked Pierre
Speránski did not shift his eyes from one face to another as people
Most of the guests, uncertain how to regard this sally, looked at the
thought of such a thing, it is only the cabinet that says it.”
Dólokhov stood at the gate of the ruined house, letting a crowd
Nicholas, when he had come to tell her that her brother was with the
innate love of death or of rebirth to a new life.” These words are all
immense force upon Kutúzov’s line of communication with the troops
overtures for peace.
French had given battle at Borodinó, did not achieve its purpose when it


The hospital was in a small Prussian town that had been twice devastated
several thousand rubles.
“Oh, I took one all right,” said Tíkhon.
to everybody who has business with me. My head is sometimes in a whirl.

Anna Pávlovna’s “At Home” was like the former one, only the
misshapen, and grim as ever.


referred to as a renegade French subject), Michaud, Toll, Count Stein
oneself to regard the arrangements without religious awe of his genius,
As soon as Nicholas entered in his hussar uniform, diffusing around him
Benefit performances, poor pictures, statues, benevolent societies,
twenty years in vain. He was a model steward, possessing in the highest

as was his custom when at home—taking leave of a good-looking,
before Krems was really of small importance in view of such events as
reason for not carrying out his intention to enter the army lay in the
considered it her duty to nurse him—felt to her surprise and vexation
among them; but this was told chiefly to introduce Rostopchín’s witty
bast were hanging on the broken and withered branch of a magnolia.
Meanwhile Nesvítski, Zherkóv, and the officer of the suite were
one takes, I don’t care about that.”



me,” she said, trying to smile, but her tears still flowed and sobs


The whole day had been hot. Somewhere a storm was gathering, but only
previously sent; and a spy, a prisoner, and a general who has been
Prince Andrew looked inquiringly at him and gave no reply.
Prince Andrew’s mind.
in Russia—and there the whole battle of the twenty-sixth of August took
to all the club members and to all the club guests, and finally to

his saber. Only ten paces divided them. Dólokhov lowered his head to
Two officers were standing on the knoll, directing the men. On seeing
relating to Nikólenka, did not venture to ask any questions at dinner,
rubles I don’t know what to do with, and she stands in her tattered
criticism and was about to reply, when the expected footsteps were heard
“Bolkónski!” he whispered, his voice trembling from a consciousness
them or make them move. On the one hand, the chief steward put the state
“Zum Henker diese Russen!” * muttered a German.
expression of her father’s. His face wore that expression when his
victory, and General Bennigsen, hoping to receive from Petersburg the

them with the other squadrons.
not at the same time been giving careful instructions to the servants
five in the afternoon,” replied Bolkónski growing more animated and
“And so you think Napoleon will manage to get an army across?” asked

lying alone in the hayfield. Now, seated on the slope of the trench, he
“There is only one Paris in the world. You have been to Paris and have



upon him. What is conscience and the perception of right and wrong

we’ll go!”

“And that son of a bitch Petróv has lagged behind after all, it seems,”
narrowed disdainfully, he entered the room of the Minister of War with
thought she, “if I ventured to confide what I am feeling to someone.

treatment and did not value her life.
studying the events from the letters of the sovereigns and the generals,
who commits such a crime always knows just where that welfare lies. And
and frequent blushes she told him she was very sorry about their past

This curious contradiction is not accidental. Not only does it occur at
beautiful, and majestic city; and a strange and majestic moment! In what
Milorádovich asking whether he is to engage the French or retire. An
movement of soldiers forming ranks and getting their muskets ready,
BOOK SIX: 1808 - 10
sometimes laughed. She hardly ever left the house and of those who came
“I knew,” thought Nicholas, “that I should never understand
and overtook him. A sergeant of the battalion ran up and took the flag

CHAPTER VI
about Paris and about some changes he meant to make in the Empress’
philosophizing voice with pleasure.


An elderly sergeant who had approached the officer while he was giving
She had noticed with what dissatisfaction he turned from the look she
“How is it I am not moving? I have fallen, I am killed!” Rostóv
Napoleon.”
circumstances, society, and race—by that elemental force against which
marriage was Hélène’s mother, Princess Kurágina. She was continually
as I know, that girl is not the kind of girl who could please Prince
Alexander and even his envoy to Napoleon, Balashëv hastened to inform

    CHAPTER XVI

close together had to stand for some hours at that crossway. From all

forward from page to page,” he thought. “I used to understand what
reproached her in his heart and tried to despise her, but he now felt so
everyone he could stop, but got no answer from anyone.
trousseau had to be ordered and the house sold. Moreover, Prince Andrew
“Look, Prince,” said another, who would have dearly liked to take
do it. He did not know why, but he felt a foreboding that he would not
them to our Brotherhood. Only then will our order have the power


and the curtain rose.
Prince Andrew jumped up as if someone had burned him, and again began
they caught at his hand and kissed his shoulder he patted their backs
And he began to explain Freemasonry as he understood it to Prince

by reference to the mass only: stating that momenta are equal or unequal
son of a dishonest father, the misconduct of a woman who had fallen
near sixty, dear friend... I too... All will end in death, all! Death is
beg—I’ll take it!”
“No, Peter Nikoláevich; I only want to show that in the cavalry
youth, there also opened out a new and hitherto uncomprehended side of
the King himself!” cried he, looking around him with eyes that glittered
For some seconds they gazed with frightened eyes at one another’s
Here!” exclaimed different voices; and the heavy breathing of the
“I told you it was all lumps and holes!” the little princess
looked as if by that slight motion the army itself was expressing its
Moscow balls.
“Oh, so that is Vereshchágin!” said Pierre, looking at the firm, calm
They stood or lay not seeing the wolf or understanding the situation.

Rostopchín’s orders to burn the barges and had in connection with that
and quiet comment on the advantage or disadvantage of Bennigsen’s

CHAPTER IX
of life, with his delicate white fingers raised from the green quilt the

forefather Adam to our own times, is that temple reared which is to be
found the Prussian army. Borís, speaking with deliberation, told them
and from the fact that some people Pierre knew as the meekest and
sounded far away. Here everyone clearly saw and said that the battle

several looters. But of all these various suspected characters, Pierre
formerly when he did not grasp what lay before him or was said to


“A soldier on leave—a shirt outside breeches,” he would say.
from la grippe; grippe being then a new word in St. Petersburg, used

Specialist historians describing the campaign of 1813 or the restoration
Antichrist—I really believe he is Antichrist—I will have nothing
disposition it is said that, after the fight has commenced in this
“Never, never marry, my dear fellow! That’s my advice: never marry
And he handed him his clasp knife. The officer admired it.
road through Poltáva, which Charles XII chose.” Balashëv involuntarily
Andrew mirthless and tiresome. Speránski’s high-pitched voice struck
she had been unable to close her eyes on account of his moaning, and at
the prim visitor could not help joining in.
Natásha trained the family to get used to him, proudly assuring them
pleasure of being courted often stifles real feeling in her. And it must
with exasperation, symptoms of a growing attachment between her son and
“What is the connection of that man with my childhood and life?” he
With reference to diplomacy, all Napoleon’s arguments as to his
Emperor?”



Kutúzov felt and knew—not by reasoning or science but with the whole of
Pale and agitated, Natásha ran into the drawing room.
“I assure you that the town of Smolénsk is not in the slightest danger
bring himself to part from his daughter and give her to a husband. The
soldiers, and militiamen began running forward along the road.
two almost sleepless nights passed on a short sofa without bedding—all
“But I can’t believe it,” insisted Sónya. “I don’t
Freedom not limited by anything is the essence of life, in man’s
the expression of the will of someone endowed with power, but that
would not have been much stimulated by it, for what had they to do with
His comrades, the prisoner soldiers walking beside him, avoided looking
had been bayoneted in the back before his eyes, for hardly had he run
grenadiers stood there in blue uniforms unfastened in front and with
suddenly awoke with a start and in a cold perspiration.
serfs. The only thing that made Princess Mary anxious about him was that
chance and genius become superfluous.
“What misfortune? What misfortune can happen to them? They just live
had distinguished himself and were pleased with their achievement—though
ce sont les jolies femmes, * isn’t that so? But now I like it very
CHAPTER XX
worn-out, gloomy-faced bootmakers, wearing overalls and long tattered
but had now handed it all completely over to his son’s care, being

take a seat beside her.
him essential to see Natásha. In the evening he drove to his sister’s
“Well, Karabákh! We’ll do some service tomorrow,” said he, sniffing its
himself, but she felt that his incomprehensible words had an improper
During the winter Prince Andrew had come to Bald Hills and had been gay,
the table which was scrawled over with figures, wet with spilled wine,
of the enemy’s lines, which all day long had yielded ground to us
“What do you mean?” asked Speránski quietly, lowering his eyes.
carriage window and looked back and then forward at the long train of


appeared to him like magic-lantern pictures at which he had long been
the most part harmful (the harm was scarcely perceptible, as they
Her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone besides
CHAPTER XII


little princess, shrugging her shoulders.
was. Now he excused himself for having been taken prisoner and now,


while the less their direct participation in the action itself, the more

forever by not asking to remain attached to the sovereign’s person, but
family group broke up.
and similar unnatural exploits, but unobtrusively, simply, organically,
with Napoleon and had been bribed by him, and so on, and so on.
this man and that man, did not execute such and such maneuvers....

a smile at the young pilgrim.
whole government! And what a government! They see treason everywhere and
“Come! Balagá is here.”
to hear of this, but Prince Andrew was firm. He came every day to the
“Now he is censured and accused by all who were enthusiastic about him
    CHAPTER I
Pierre saw that his words were not in vain and that Prince Andrew would

attention.
lips.
day in Moscow. All Denísov’s Moscow friends gave him a farewell
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
behind some trees on the right and saw a group of girls running to cross
whispering, and betraying by every word and movement that they none
been dreadful for him, but he understood it differently. He thought it
he suddenly cried. “Even without a bet, there! Tell them to bring me a
down the room.


village!” he said angrily to a general who had ridden up. “Don’t
“The king’s heart is in the hands of the Lord.”
“It’s not at all from friendship,” declared Nicholas, flaring


of the peoples it does not enter anyone’s head today to suppose that
“What force!” remarked one. “Knocked the roof and ceiling all to
“When am I to wear it?” and Natásha stuck it in her coil of hair. “When
Rostóv, in common with the whole army from which he came, was far
house seemed topsy-turvy. All the doors were open, all the furniture was
hostility and suspicion. For some seconds all were silent.
the people in the defense of Moscow, Pierre had met the Rostóvs and
A stout major was pacing up and down the line, and regardless of the
    CHAPTER XXII
elbows, as if to say: “You can tell me your views later, but now be so
to make some preparations and to be ready to receive the sovereign.
killed them so well and was so cunning and wise that when he returned to

it.
don’t trouble yourself further.”
the cutting and there it was cold and damp, but above Pierre’s head was
wives and children streamed to the southeast, to parts where none of
Prince Andrew to himself. While listening to this whispering and feeling
own. When she did not understand, it was sweeter still to think that
by a mask of unconcern and ridicule of themselves, their situation, and

disconcerted. The sight of the discomposure of that old man of the world
smile. “I had heard about you from my page, Drubetskóy. Have you
has spread out and disappeared. Do you understand, my child?” said the
“Beautiful,” said the doctor in answer to a remark about the
force their way through them with bayonets.
would not supply them. Pierre was obliged to wait. Without undressing,
so the countess had been sent for. Pierre saw the distracted count, and
horses, past sentinels and men who saluted their colonel and stared with
imagination a whole series of reminiscences arose from those sounds.
Hostilities are ended, we can shake one another’s hand.... The
effect that one ought not to go to the French theater and that to
Princess Mary again shook her head disapprovingly.
to disperse.

I suppose that the nobility have been summoned not merely to express
And the commander, turning to look at the adjutant, directed his jerky
same time at the Emperor Francis.
“Leave it, Vasílich will put it away. It’s not wanted.”
from the theater, had had supper and were grouped round the clavichord.
from the room with a moan either of pain or sorrow.
When the last convulsions of the body, which the spirit was leaving,
said the countess smiling.
colors, who were shouting something in shrill voices.
it were seven hundred miles of hunger-stricken, hostile country; ahead
undertake a task that is impossible for them not because of its
evident.
the old Russian type. His purse was always empty because it was open to
Though five minutes before, Prince Andrew had been able to say a few

every moment. They are my enemies. In my opinion they are all criminals.

domination based on the application or threat of physical force, like

dying of fright. I did, ‘pon my word, I got that frightened!” said
“As the enemy’s left wing rests on wooded hills and his right

affair without knowing for certain how many there are. I like to work
“Why do you say that?” replied Princess Mary. “Why do you say that,
“Oh, very well, you may stay in attendance on me.”

and tried to discover what he thought about marriage.
not know whether a certain order received in the form of advice emanated

melancholy was just like the august melancholy she showed at the mention
old fool who, without any reason, keeps his own daughter at a distance
Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circle and
not attract a moment’s attention to their own evolutions and did not
Pierre took off his spectacles, which made his face seem different and
conceal its effects—the surroundings in which he had been happy became
nails. All the officers appeared to be, and really were, in love with
“Why this delay? Why no betrothal?” he thought. Once, when he had

were still the count’s games of whist and boston, at which—spreading
into a shed boarded up with planks!” He smiled, and went and lay down to
The carpets yielded and the lid closed; Natásha, clapping her hands,
opinion which had that day originated among the higher French officers,

the same tone. Many spoke eloquently and with originality.
to come to dinner next day, Sunday, and bring a copy of the manifesto
their heels the greater distance they had to cover. Only by following
the other, glanced inquiringly with his large, intelligent, kindly eyes

Rostóv.
sides had fallen in, another was on fire, and bright flames issued from
no longer was and at that moment considered themselves happy.
looking at those driving past as if he pitied all who were not at that
P.S. Let me have news of your brother and his charming little wife.

“So there’s nothing?”

“The King of Rome!” he said, pointing to the portrait with a graceful

Dólokhov had composed for Anatole, and as she read it she found in it

Dron was disconcerted, glanced furtively at Alpátych and again lowered
in a cheerful voice:
“Mind, no holding on!” cried another.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect
fear of refusal, like a boy asking for permission to get on a horse, he

Before Belliard was out of sight, a messenger from another part of the
looking at Natásha.
very easily and quickly on three legs, as if disdaining to use all
of the sayings and doings of their commander, the Grand Duke, and told

and he often thought about her. But he never thought about her as he


broad face expressed pity and sympathy. This expression irritated Prince
condition of his consent that the wedding is not to take place for a
heard on every side.

crowded with peasant carts, some loaded high and already corded up,
Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Bolkónski’s estate, lay forty miles east
tokens of base metal that have no value but merely jingle. As gold is
the column, gave him the order to advance.
“Now to tell one’s fortune in the empty bathhouse is frightening!”

Márina and drowned some eighteen thousand in one day.”
“Oh, how dreadful! How can you laugh at it, Count?”
     * “Forty thousand men massacred and the army of our allies

to have any children by me.”


that low and simple kind that Pierre had once felt for his wife, nor
transparently radiant with impulsive joy.
copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
was accustomed to understand him. He led him to the desk, raised the

highest aristocracy, to an ambassador’s ball he had attended, and to
vehicles packed with china that had been captured from him at Borísov
grief and by her own personal feelings which she shared with no one.
and there locked himself in and wept bitterly. When he came in to tea,
CHAPTER XIII
Princess Mary postponed her departure. Sónya and the count tried to

empty and that the nurse had been hiding the dead baby. He drew the

seizing the transports, Major Denísov, being drunk, went to the chief

Again he closed his eyes. His sobs ceased, he pointed to his eyes, and
There were only thoughts clearly expressed in words, thoughts that
I consider it my duty to let you know of it. He is said to be very
and involuntary.
smile that usually brightened her face. Pierre knew that everyone was
“I cannot help loving the light, it is not my fault. And I am very
liked her singing as he liked everything she did.
entrance. But Napoleon had dressed and come out with such unexpected
of the campfire, waving his uplifted arm.
the left was the dying embers of a campfire, that the man who had come
fence was broken and branches of the plum trees had been torn off with

began, and without replying to Sónya’s words of comfort she got into
courtiers), was clear to everyone. It was this: the Emperor did not
of it. How much more complex than this is the game of war, which
The count, forgetting to smooth out the smile on his face, looked into
she stood still in the middle of the room and sang a musical phrase that

holding on with a boat hook to the ship of the people and himself
just completed. He lay with his head propped high on the pillows. His
something in her reticule. “Besides, the trousseau is ready, so there
mistakes and that none of his moves were perfect. He only notices the
of Christian men professing the law of love of their fellows slew one
his groom who was holding his horses and, asking which was the quietest,
Dear Count Aléxis Andréevich—(He was writing to Arakchéev but knew that
face was of a pale-greenish tint, shouting to his men. “Go round! Wait
were to land at Naples, and how a total force of five hundred thousand


smile which caused Princess Mary to turn pale. “He’s worrying very much

he looked very grim he said nothing to anyone.
“One can’t write so fast, your honor,” said the clerk, glancing

“Come along with me to our knoll. We can get a view from there and in
forces they are obliged to admit, in addition to the insufficient

troops were ill-clad, exhausted, and had lost a third of their number
him where he had been. He replied. She again inquired whether
for negligence or inefficiency so staggered him that, forgetting the

front of her looking with pleasure at the town, she bowed her head
last dim, indistinctly outlined square. But ready as she was to take the
his glittering black eyes at Rostóv.
Princess Mary with a gaily mocking smile: “He looks just, yes, just as
vulgarity of the expressions that were natural to her, though she had
in Kishenëv with only a Moldavian peasant woman to help instead of a

a voice from behind the fire with a repressed laugh.
be seen from the hill on the opposite bank but was not yet visible from
as ever. A solitary tallow candle burned in the anteroom.
having stuck an amber mouthpiece far into his mouth, was inhaling the
qualifications for it—the kind of good-natured, fussy shallowness

it!’ ‘Yes, let’s!’ say the others. And off they go and take the
In the last analysis we reach the circle of infinity—that final limit
Pierre.
Some of the nearest relatives had not yet left. They were sitting in
in spite of this, both the face and words of his new acquaintance were
leisure to an account of the great deeds he had done, he wrote:
his rain-soaked underclothes, said his prayers, drank tea, got warm,

“But why are you angry?” remonstrated Tíkhon, “just as if I’d never seen
discontented and want to do something for mankind. But perhaps all these
life, the destiny of man, and the laws which govern the world. But who

“Where is your dispatch?” he inquired. “Give it to me. I will send it to


of a parade. We had expected, as I told you, to get at their rear by
mallets and swords. As he was being led up to some object he noticed a
him several riders with white plumes in their hats. In a moment everyone
groaning aloud and swinging his arm which had just been hurt, while


ever since he had overtaken the regiment in Poland, had lived with the

marry.... And I am sure there will not be a happier man than you.”
her. When she was touched, she jerked her bound legs and looked wildly
human skull with its cavities and teeth. After reading the first words
me in war the energy of young men often shows the way better than all
this is absolutely true.
backwards down from the oven, her bare little feet catching at its
her?—The real truth, because you know Andrew is risking so much doing
others appreciated Prince Hippolyte’s social tact in so agreeably
but only repeats his sayings...” added Nicholas, yielding to that
“The enemy has been repulsed on the left and defeated on the right

well-supplied district and the parallel road was open to him along
sometimes devised other words they might have spoken.
forward.
to the conversation. Magnítski starting quizzing Stolýpin about his
this consciousness of mismanagement became a general conviction, but as
Mademoiselle Bourienne, “Mary’s is a face which such a coiffure does


“Ah what a calamity! You say the affair was decisive? But Mortier is
“You’re always like that; you thwow a thing down anywhere and forget
her sufferings or with their relief. The pangs began again and Mary
there. Now then!”

of the action and our judgment of it.
know in what capacity he was questioned by Bennigsen, the Grand Duke,
“It’s a good day, eh? For a hunt and a gallop, eh?” asked
whether they were as contented as he was, and people felt pleased by his
but on the left flank the columns of infantry, cavalry, and artillery,

worn and irritable. The infantry passing before him came to a halt
Natásha, throwing a clean pocket handkerchief over her hair and holding
go to the devil!” Pfuel was one of those theoreticians who so love

He closed his eyes, and immediately a sound of cannonading, of musketry
road wide enough?” said he, turning to a man behind him who was not
Nearly two years before this, in 1808, Pierre on returning to Petersburg
“The Emperor! The Emperor!” was suddenly heard among the hussars.
“Look at Papa!” shouted Natásha to the whole company, and quite

himself, and at once without any effort saw in everyone he met
and cheerful.

passed along the Sadóvaya Street the carriages and carts formed two rows

“Only when will all that be? I am afraid never.... It would be too
“Really?” said Pierre, gazing over his spectacles with curiosity and

The Russian officer in charge of the transport lolled back in the front
again met Anatole in the little sitting room. Hélène had disappeared
“Inform the prince that I the bridge fired!” said the colonel
Pierre did not allow himself to reflect on what lay before him, but
ideas and of Speránski, and a diligent Petersburg newsmonger—one of
she could not get on without medical treatment, so they kept her in the
and industrious artisans, return to your work, your houses, your shops,


from Moscow back to the Niemen were like those in a game of Russian
merrily.

“I promised to go to a reception.”
you, but why should I bother about you? You’d be only too glad, of
officers.
doing a little—though I did very little and did it very badly? What
road. Bagratión’s exhausted and hungry detachment, which alone
This being the field marshal’s frame of mind he was naturally regarded
CHAPTER XIV
I am told.”
    CHAPTER XIII
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means

lower part of it something quivered.
for no one believed it to be possible; it resulted from a most complex
against his right, flew round again in a circle. Natásha guessed what
for his horses, and when he had had his tea he went to bed.
provinces as I gave him Finland. Yes,” he went on, “I promised and would
betraying her sympathy for the “daredevil,” as she called Dólokhov.
“That’s right,” said the man, whom Pétya took to be an hussar. “Was the


doubtful does the free will of those concerned in the event become and


“Anísya, go and see if the strings of my guitar are all right. I
her that if he lived he would always thank God for his wound which had
you require money for your journey...”
Timókhin looked about in confusion, not knowing what or how to answer
troops from attacking.
the foe made him forget his own sorrow. He was entirely devoted to the
She lay for a long time in that position.
     Thou, without whom happiness would for me be impossible,
the samovar. The children with their tutors and governesses had had
The intrusion of Pierre’s nonmilitary figure in a white hat made an

ready, but Pierre learned that it was being constructed by the Emperor’s
rods, would have done, for he had nothing that either the sergeant major
man is as surly as a dog.”
Unconsciously she immediately invented a reason for going down, and
of all these words and all this trouble was, after converting her to

“Well, Michael Ivánovich, our Bonaparte will be having a bad time
said the old man, “say so, my dear sir.” And he suddenly smiled, in
sound of their hurried footsteps going to the back porch. Natásha got

it never entered my head and I wouldn’t do that for their good! That’s

die means that I, a particle of love, shall return to the general and
occupation of Moscow by the enemy and its destruction by fire, the most

It was necessary to fight an unexpected battle at Smolénsk to save our
come directly,” Pierre replied to the major-domo.

his excellency’s courtyard unseemly, told the dragoons to take it away.
“Yes, it can’t be helped if they won’t take less. Ah, dear me! I
amid every occupation, was now replaced, not by another question or by a
awkwardness or intentionally (no one could have said which) after the
It was plain that this cadet had already repeatedly asked for a lift and
A dozen persons who had business with Pierre were awaiting him in the
interrupted her.

smoothing down her dress with an inquiring look at her mother, when
All were silent. On this fact relating to the Emperor personally, it was


recorded in the annals of all the law courts of the world, but which
is not abashed now, so she cannot be a bad woman!” He had often begun
heard he is getting married? And also from my husband’s friend
had a double meaning.
Borís came to the Rostóvs’ box, received their congratulations very
mother, pushing away her daughter with pretended sternness, and turning
will begin. And he says Buonaparte is in Braunau! Shows you’re a fool.



he marked the figures in his clear, bold hand.
pity’s sake, leave this helpless youth who, after all, was the son of
    CHAPTER VI
till the general asked him to restore it. All his absent-mindedness and
holiday so noticeable as in Márya Dmítrievna’s broad, stern face,
Petersburg militia, presiding over the enrollment of recruits at the
Timókhin, who had not slept at all because of the pain in his leg, had
According to their accounts a reaction took place at that time in Russia
before when she was present, Nicholas went up to her without waiting to
understanding of the meaning of the scene he had witnessed between
by his comrades, was sent to obtain remounts and brought back from the

and officers advanced to the gate. In the gateway lay three wounded and
Tattered, blue-purple clouds, reddening in the east, were scudding

Andrúsha!...” said she, putting her hand in her reticule but not yet

standing, when just above his head he heard several voices shouting
find out where Dólokhov was and whether he would come that evening.
father!” thought she, trying to restrain her wrath. “Hard as it may
Prince Vasíli, with one leg thrown high over the other and a snuffbox

seized all the private carts in Moscow and on one hundred and thirty-six
abandoning their comrades who were farther behind. Then for three days
Just then a commissariat soldier, a hospital orderly, came in from the
he had said absent-mindedly: “Yes, she’s good looking,” he had

“Yes,” replied Prince Andrew, “but with this little difference, that
new friend’s influence.


“Eh?”
The crowd ran after the Emperor, followed him to the palace, and began
commander in chief. He was convinced that he alone could maintain

block the road to Moscow as before, the aim of the French had not been


They say and write and print that the soul and freedom do not exist,
understanding of power for true gold.
“Oh, those servants!” said the count, swaying his head.
And again all the faces in that crowd bore an identical expression,
leaders, with a crowd of vagrants, and with Peter the Hermit, remains
naked shoulders. She did not give him the money, but let herself be
another and Kutúzov most of all. Anticipation that the failure of
or else what is to become of them?”
you...” and he slammed the door.
“How simple and clear it is,” thought Pierre. “How is it I did not know
ice and into the water and oftenest of all among the crowd that covered
All the Russians confined with Pierre were men of the lowest class and,
spirit had been laid.
“Do you remember me?” asked Borís quietly with a pleasant smile.
began to wail as they looked at the fires—the smoke and even the flames
changing from one thing to another had never accomplished—were carried
lips could not grasp its rim. Anatole was sobbing painfully. “Yes, it is
of the peoples, assured himself that the aim of his actions had been the
Smolénsk threatening Bald Hills—even then I wouldn’t serve in the

it to the saddle. Their horses, bridled and with high saddles, stood
him, this expedient of an inquiry and trial seemed unnecessary. It was
would result from the common activity; while the man who commanded

eternity.” And again he twisted the screw with the stripped thread,

subject. “I was told they are coming soon. I am also expecting Andrew
“And there’s nothing for you to say. I shall speak to him myself,”
said the woman.
smile and with tears in her eyes, occasionally shaking her head. She
direction—along the Kalúga road. Dokhtúrov was unwilling to undertake
what looked like a squadron of horsemen in various uniforms. Two of them
even the manifesto itself should no better pretext present itself.


given that they should find in them the help and protection due to
man was more to her than Nastásya Ivánovna, the buffoon. Something stood
About ten o’clock Rostóv went to the English Hotel straight from the
was Mademoiselle Bourienne. She greeted the father and daughter
to do with her? She is like a mad woman when you are away. Doesn’t see
who dealt the blow, the look of silent, timid reproach that boy in the

were thousands of inhabitants deceived into believing that Moscow would
the bank of the Drissa. As there was not a single town or large
to myself the condition of my inner man and the grace of God sanctifying
and took aim at the French. “Fire!” repeated the officer once more,


“You can’t come in! You can’t!” said a terrified voice from
with that maniac’s bullet in my body?”

would even be increased if he refused to pay his wife’s debts which he
Suddenly, he did not know why, he felt a pang. The day was so beautiful,


was rapidly and excitedly talking to a French grenadier. “Hark to him
attentively and scrutinizingly at her. She asked herself in perplexity:
the inquisitive man, and looked around him.
felt sure his commander was sending for him to punish him for breach of
“But really, hadn’t I better go away?” he asked, looking kindly at


The militiamen carried Prince Andrew to the dressing station by the
here’s another admirer of that powder-monkey emperor of yours,” he
to hear him in the study talking in a loud animated voice about some
understand for a long time, till at last Tíkhon understood and repeated
for half an hour repeating the same words to the various arrivals,

and, before the latter had time to draw his sword, knocked him off his
Not letting the abbé and Pierre escape, Anna Pávlovna, the more
Bilíbin smiled and the wrinkles on his face disappeared.
apply for an official post, so he had come to Petersburg to look for one
of the campaign. It would be difficult and even impossible to imagine
came in and saw him she paused. “Is it possible that this stranger
Mary. She got up and, almost crying, began to arrange her wallet. She



villa at Sokólniki. The anteroom and reception room of his house
then named Prince Vasíli in an inquiring whisper, then pointed to the
them, and will send these visitors to the devil. I will come back to
whispered Shinshín. Countess Bezúkhova turned smiling to the newcomer,
once to the general on duty.”
do you remain silent when heaven knows who permits herself to
Hardly had they reached the bottom of the hill before their pace
a wrathful wrinkle on her rather prominent marble brow. With her
into an old man’s simplehearted talk; but the hearty sincerity of that

to Pierre were qualities) of untidiness and neglect of herself, she now
he clutched at his head. “Who is going to get me the flowers? Dmítri!
Pétya took off his wet clothes, gave them to be dried, and at once began
was great, but now that he has become a wretched comedian the Emperor

an indescribable charm of sorrow and self-forgetfulness that her father


“Oh, please... May I stay with you?” cried Pétya.


they were saying was amusing, but because she felt happy and was unable
can evidently not cover the life of the peoples. And the history of the
1. Discretion, the keeping of the secrets of the Order. 2. Obedience to
to speak he seemed not to know how he would conclude.

independent of that position in which he found himself were the joyful
hand, was clearing manure from the cowhouse, looked out, and his face
directs nor increases its movement foams ahead of it, and at a distance

the hunters who were arriving. The presence of Natásha—a woman, a
of the staff who asked where he was going.
miles away from the French. At Grunth also some apprehension and alarm
encounter and to preserve his troops, the massacre of the broken mob
grateful to her benefactors, and so faithfully, unchangingly, and
center—destroy him and his army.
the dinner sat silent, glancing with a frightened look now at her
Bourienne rapidly, in her pleasant mellow tones and with guttural r’s.
Before the end of the fast of St. Peter, Agraféna Ivánovna Belóva, a
we can foretell the result.
who had grown old in society and at court. He went up to Anna Pávlovna,
horses got ready for the princess’ carriages and eighteen carts for
depressed. Without greeting the officers, he scratched himself and asked
desire; that the enemy must be offered “a golden bridge”; that neither

    CHAPTER V
friend.”
missed them. They have gone to your estate near Moscow.”
giving orders that every messenger should be allowed to wake him up. In
strained frown she peered toward the world where he was. And now, now
“Bonaparte treats Europe as a pirate does a captured vessel,” said

“He left long ago. She has been at death’s door.”
without knowing why, felt awkward about paying court to her. When they
incomprehensible—the death of one she loved.
Having ridden in the smoke past the Sixth Corps, behind the artillery

to them was the chief cause of the liberal movement at the commencement
flank—still more obstinately. We should have attacked Napoleon in the
lying down.
by. Pierre caught a glimpse of a man in a three-cornered hat with a
and, resolving to break the silence, looked at Natásha and at Princess
may?”

It was becoming dangerous to remain in Boguchárovo. News of the approach
In contrast with the dread felt by the infantrymen placed in support,
horses’ feet at the wolf.

CHAPTER XIV
found them in Pierre’s hat, where he had carefully tucked them under the
the enemy’s line, and a cavalry attack by “the men of iron,” all these
Arakchéev’s eyes turned toward him.


recollection of him. “If he had told me he was drunk and did not see...
still quite a young lady, before her nose was broken; how she had aged
weakness which assailed him at this touching recollection.

ambitious activity.

remember her gave him pleasure, and when his comrades, hearing of his
aim remaining for him was to effect a junction with the forces that were

harming no one but necessary to the happiness of others—are called
He did not like talking about his life as a soldier, though he did not

The commencement of his speech had obviously been made with the
“Isn’t she too young? I have heard that it harms the voice to train

at himself. “I had other duties,” thought he. “The people had to be
Toward evening Ilágin took leave of Nicholas, who found that they were
Soon after that a report was received from Dórokhov’s guerrilla
“Adèle tempted me: she kept on telling me to buy it,” returned Pierre.
into the bushes, removed his sodden hat by its floppy brim, and
people, loving one another; none of them capable of injuring
and his round face seemed rounder and pleasanter than ever.
army is presented to us by the historians as something great and
on to. But as soon as a storm arises and the sea begins to heave and
officers were whispering together. Dólokhov was a long time mounting

was only a momentary feeling and Count Rostopchín smiled disdainfully


sixteen.
killed and wounded, thereby, he considered, testing his strength of
timidly when all this happened before,” thought Natásha, “and in
“I am here, your excellency.”
and what do you think, dear friends?” Karatáev continued, his face
“My dearest darling... Mummy, my precious!...” she whispered
deserved her reputation of being a very clever woman. Had she attempted
prominent eyes were gazing calmly and fixedly at her, Natásha, to break
force had already descended into the valley toward the ponds and lakes
and the officers collected round to greet the new arrival, Rostóv
infantry officer who just before the battle had rushed out of

“Count! Count!” shouted Berg who ran up from the other side as eager
the Guards to the field of battle, afraid of letting a ready victim



Countess Rostóva’s carriage in which they were seated drove over the
weak, and alone, with no ground to stand on.
months, where they were every moment fighting death from hunger and
On the appointed day Prince Andrew entered Count Arakchéev’s waiting
“Have you brought me sad news, Colonel?”

and involuntarily noticed the carefully washed seams of the scar near
with curly light-brown hair and beautiful eyes, was delighted because
back of their necks. In the midst of the outspread line of Cossacks two
that these thoughts had been suggested to Prince Andrew by his
rights of the conquering nation have increased to the detriment of the
man... Simplicity is submission to God. Suffering is necessary... the
esteem his lofty qualities. I will detain you no longer, General; you

half in earnest; but Natásha noticed that her father was flurried on
conversation, gave no reply.
it was that the pain distracted him and prevented his seeing what he had
of this class, by mutually destroying one another’s positions, destroy
“The colonel of those Württembergers is delightful,” he suddenly said.
case of any commander in chief) to prevent an attack.
after all impossible to express all one thinks; and that he had never
Moscow I will accept terms of peace worthy of myself and of my people.
glass flung it on the floor.
bosom, saying: “Now you are all mine, mine! You won’t escape!”—from that
white muslin, she returned home after communion, for the first time for
partially. For the most part things happened contrary to their orders.


When Princess Mary returned to her room after her nocturnal talk with
The groom, the coachman, and the innkeeper told Pierre that an officer


officer, who thrust his head out of the door, that warlike feeling of
the soldiers’ pipes, kitchens, and campfires, and by the carelessness of
human life.
he had met Rostóv, tried to enliven the conversation. One of the
You, peaceful inhabitants of Moscow, artisans and workmen whom


young Rostóv took no further part in any business affairs, but
look at Pierre.
When they reached a gravel path behind the house the Frenchman pulled
question. All the contradictions and obscurities of history and the
“Well, then, you know more than anyone else, be it who it may,” said
officers were counting the men, poking the last man in each section in
child gets up after a long illness with a changed expression of face.


the potato.
The count was delighted at Anna Mikháylovna’s taking upon herself one
time, muttering to herself.
plan long ago and now expounded it not so much to answer the questions


eyes. His shriveled old hands were folded and on the finger of one of
at Alpátych from the back of the crowd.

in the Bazaar and the Povarskóy, as well as the barges on the Moskvá
eyes. “But I’ll go to Bezúkhov’s myself. Pierre has arrived, and
will pass here immediately; it will please him to see these gentlemen
the conversation she noticed “Granddad” give Bennigsen a quick, subtle
amid the smoke that screened it. On the sloping descent to the Dnieper
“He visits them?”
to be separated....”

Kutúzov had found himself unable any longer to restrain the army he
he had done seven years before at Austerlitz.
Mason.
With painful dejection he awaited the end of this action, in which he
mixture onto the floor and asked for some more water. The maid brought
a long-awaited moment. He was firmly convinced that this was the day of
as he rode by.
Speránski went on to say that honor, l’honneur, cannot be upheld by
And the count gave a similar order to the major-domo and the servants.
“Do you remember him?” Natásha suddenly asked, after a moment’s

atmosphere that the eyes smart, when the lungs are strengthened and
calm, and penetrating, a look I loved so well and seem to see before me

who got across the river fled farther. Their supreme chief donned a
and way of life.
state and power might be arranged were it possible for all that to
say when it was decided to abandon Moscow, so it is impossible to say
suffering man. It would be continual torture.” And he looked searchingly
modern science of strategics, had been handed to Kutúzov when he was in
“You say you can’t see a reign of goodness and truth on earth. Nor
back, chest, shoulders, and even his arms, which he held as if ever


France.

the other side of the fire, warming his thin yellow body.
conceit prevents your apologizing, and you wish to make the whole
with a scared look and that Princess Mary was no longer by the cot.
As often happens after long sleeplessness and long anxiety, he was
Nesvítski’s and Dólokhov’s sabers, which were stuck into the
food, cleanliness, and freedom—now that he was deprived of all this,

him and said: “Terrible for you, but not for me! You know that for me
eyes. Evidently possessed by some idea, he stood over those who were

an orderly’s charge, and he felt the blood rush to his heart with
occurs under certain limits of time, and where it is not one will that
and he saw above him the remote, lofty, and everlasting sky. He knew it


you to read when I am gone. You will find them useful.”
breaking the silence and pointing to Natásha. “She looks after me all
develop existed within him. His meeting with Pierre formed an epoch in

General.”
Amid the powder smoke, slowly dispersing over the whole space through
Dólokhov remarked that the Cossacks were a danger only to stragglers
And this “Well!” sounded coldly ironic, as if he were saying: “Now

and with marked solemnity and stiffness accompanied her to the anteroom.
recognize in this big, stout man in a peasant coat the vigorous person
hoarse, feeble voice.
that Natásha had too much of something, and that because of this
unexpectedly died.
studied for a long time.
have been proud to let him see us. There now—you talk of my absence,
hat! Strange!” thought Pierre, continuing his way to Tatárinova.

hear and understand my benefactor’s words.” Again he covered himself up

gelding, sitting at home in winter, and lying in his overgrown garden in

When the necessary number of copies of the dispositions had been

French salesman from one of the Moscow shops.
The German closed his eyes, signifying that he did not understand.
girl,” he sometimes said to himself “she never makes a mistake,
Princess Mary admitted to one another that the angel’s face reminded
said Natásha.

as a dense cloud of smoke arose from it. The hussars had succeeded in

ride and especially by the sound of the bullets.

    * “Look here, no nonsense!”
still it was terrible, and she could not help thinking of it. She was

concentration on some one thought.

but hopeless: “The sovereigns, madame... What have they done for Louis
served in the 1805 campaign, had been recruiting up to strength in
through Napoleons, Louis-es, and writers; but we do not acknowledge such
naturally turned on the peace. The officers, his comrades, like most of
Nicholas too was greatly pleased by “Uncle’s” playing, and
the middle, unfastened, exposing their sunburned collarbones, impressed
“Yes, and there, further on, are the French,” said the officer. “There
window, from which the double frame had been removed (by order of the

had arrived from Bald Hills and had those horses got ready for

and would recommend him for a St. George’s Cross. When sent for by Count
that was at first hard to bear was his feet.
Late in the evening, when Rostóv was about to leave, he asked Denísov
stopped near the hounds, waiting to see how the matter would end. Out of
itself out, and ‘piti-piti-piti’ and ‘ti-ti’ and ‘piti-piti-piti’...?
son, sat at the table writing. He glanced round.
come to the governor to ask how they were to deal with their various
analogy, and passed too boldly, it seemed to Prince Andrew, from one



at once lit up for me my whole past and the future path I should follow.
afraid of grieving either.

luck! Such ill luck. As soon as you left, it began and went on. Hullo
more insight than at any other time, and understood all that is worth
ravine, he even saw the hounds, and was expecting a fox to show itself

I had the power,” he began again, “I would not take prisoners. Why take
Denísov gave no answer.
extremely—whether he was promoted to a captaincy or would receive the
his plump hand, with his one eye open, meditating and peering into the
asked Pierre.
It was Dokhtúrov again whom they sent to Formínsk and from there to
“And have you brought little Nicholas?” he asked in the same slow, quiet
perplexity about these questions. There was now within him a judge who
But though toward the end of the battle the men felt all the horror of
movement and long ago foreseen its result.
“If they had known that you wished it, the entertainment would have
begun very well and was as like as two peas to every other evening party
inquiringly at the French colonel. The colonel respectfully informed His
a short pause, “but everyone lives in his own way. You lived for
“Well then, that’s excellent,” said he. “We’ll talk it over
visitors from Petersburg, the very vortex of life, these people lagged
promised? Nothing! And what little they have promised they will not
home receiving no one and going nowhere.
At the foot of the hill lay wasteland over which a few groups of our

The clerk glanced round, evidently hoping that his joke would be
what happened—the insane, convulsive stampede of Napoleon’s army during
as a soldier after the duel with Dólokhov.” And the memory of the dinner


mechanically to sing: “Save from calamity Thy servants, O Mother of
smoke. The excited faces of the soldiers were blackened with it. Some
When Paris was mentioned, Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seized the
had done Sónya, felt herself to blame toward her, and imagined that her


three beats: “Oh mio crudele affetto.”... One, two, three... one,
capitals, he still continued to live in the country, remarking that



Prince Bagratión screwed up his eyes, looked round, and, seeing the
midway, and the same increasing rapidity as the goal is approached.
“Well, that’s right. As soon as the countess wakes we’ll be off, God
“but you have used such words to me—‘mean’ and so on—which as a man of
irritated at being continually disturbed.


At the first glance, when Davout had only raised his head from the
Napoleon’s face as, shading his eyes with his hand, he looked at the
general who, watch in hand, was saying it was time they started as all
Márya Dmítrievna, having found Sónya weeping in the corridor, made her
“Yes, I am, but please don’t let us do like that.... In another four
limit to the power of the Beast was as yet only one of the fancies that

“And me, kiss me!”

reinstate another omitted condition of every command proceeding not from
horse still struggled.
begged him to begin. Everyone became silent.
pond. He longed to get into that water, however dirty it might be, and

Natásha, raising her face for a moment from her mother’s mantilla,

indestructible.
to the fox which began to dodge between the field in sharper and sharper
When on the first day he got up early, went out of the shed at dawn, and
already opening a door.
“There! Here’s a patriot for you!” said Shinshín.
that they were not attending on him (he was no longer there, he had left


“Denísov, don’t make fun of it!” cried Rostóv. “It is such a
Some hussars who galloped up disengaged his foot and helped him into the
inquiring to what set they belonged, here looked down on them.
“Just wait a minute, sir. One little moment,” said she.
Kutúzov noticed an expression of extreme tension. He was satisfied with
formerly to be with Pierre, and came to see him every day. To Pierre as
son’s affair hushed up, but even he was ordered out of Petersburg.”
apparently the sight of them roused no pleasant feeling in Véra.
come on!” said “Uncle.” “You see it’s damp weather, and you

dinner. Two officers of his own division joined him. The conversation
So the swishing sound of the strokes, and the desperate but unnatural
or enlightenment of citizens of France or some other country. But not


helplessly and he made a fruitless effort to pull it forward. Whether he
Perhaps it need not be done so pedantically, thought Nicholas, or even
Prince Andrew, especially after the abandonment of Smolénsk on the sixth
combined with her indifference to everything about her. Her black eyes
“How dare you take it?” he shouted.

offered a most striking contrast to his quiet, little wife. It was
of blessedness which now flooded his heart with glad emotion.
arrived in France with a battalion, and the French, who had been hating
“Oh! Oh! Oh!” groaned Kutúzov despairingly and looked around....
occurred to his regiment, but in reality he did not himself know what
having taken a dozen steps he seemed to remember something and stopped.
If the aim of the European wars at the beginning of the nineteenth
turning mockingly to Ramballe.
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
good!” said Natásha, rising and going to the looking glasses.
a St. George’s Cross to the bravest of the French Guards. It has to be
minute and must go back—but you wrap the fur cloak round her first thing
longer he thought the more contingencies presented themselves. He
But Pierre was not listening to the woman. He had for some seconds been
“They meet, as we shall meet tomorrow, to murder one another; they kill
interfere, making a scene on the very threshold of a dying man’s room?
“Gone away,” said Ermólov’s orderly.
used to like to spend them, or to open his mind by intimate talks with
her armchair and called Natásha and the count to her.
The officer, mounting his horse, rode off to someone else.
they reached Borodinó, seventy miles from Moscow. From Vyázma Napoleon
by his talk with Murat, he did not rise or even stir, but scowled still
comprehension.
all follow that the march was the cause of it.
a wish to see her often, but yet always became ill-humored when she
“Into the stove... into the fire with it! I tell you once for all, my
At that moment, on the road leading from the big house, two women and a
her, she is so much to be pitied, so much to be pitied.”
pipe firmly with the other. Panting and puffing, the major grumbled and
Pierre, and a feeling that was both joyful and painful agitated him and
“Yes, that’s me!” she seemed to say, answering the rapt gaze with
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,

They spoke of the countess’ health, of their mutual friends, of the
He might... not only might but should, have gone up to the sovereign. It
down in it, and listened to Pierre, coughing discontentedly and frowning


equals, while his eyes occasionally sought out his fine well-set-up


He was suffering physically. He, the commander in chief, a Serene
Her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up, giving her not a
“Hear the firing,” said the groom, a discharged soldier. “All the
my dream.
“Do you know I have entrusted him with our secret? I have known him
and respect as few hardhearted men would have aroused. Although he was
explain to us what without its help man cannot comprehend: why, for what
could not break away from her, and that though it would be a terrible
may perhaps have a stronger effect on the sincere seeker after wisdom
agreeable and interesting work. His face expressed more satisfaction
Since early morning—despite an injunction not to approach the picket
A minute later the old man’s large stout figure in full-dress uniform,
and so it was only necessary not to stop their flight. Secondly it was

Melyukóvka, it is still stranger that we drove heaven knows where and
opinion), but he urged that at this point the army should unite and


CHAPTER XIII
it reached Vílna it numbered only fifty thousand, and at Kálisch less
not stop at any one of these positions because Kutúzov did not wish to
Petersburg, on their estate near Moscow, or with her mother, that is to
“Such an insolent scoundrel!” he cried, growing hot again at the mere
than once. “You know it won’t do to leave your posts like this.
This unpleasant impression merely flitted over the young and happy face

awaiting his Serene Highness, as everyone now called Kutúzov. From the
her way in the big forest. She incoherently described the depths of
“Why doesn’t the red-haired gunner run away as he is unarmed?
been taken out of the churches and everybody was to be ordered to leave.

he felt that in proportion to the efforts of that fatal force to crush


prostrated himself before the Gates of the Temple. And really, the
Dunyásha, the nurse, and Michael Ivánovich following her.


by Napoleon at a review, evoked in him a desire to punish the Russians
“Later... later! Tomorrow. It’s too late...”
    CHAPTER VII
Why carry you off as if you were some gypsy singing girl?... Well, if he
pronounced some words. Tears, the cause of which she herself did not
the panorama seemed carved in some precious stone of a yellowish-green
cavalrymen were espied they were taken for Frenchmen, the coachman ran
paternal intentions of His Majesty the Emperor and King and to
glowing eyes and his resolute gait, the terrible indications of that
years, but that he had not dared to think of her because she was too
his eyes at the sight.
formal “you” instead of the intimate “thou” in speaking to her.
remained in the calèche, but at Mytíshchi the wounded man himself asked
case proofs were needed; he had waited a whole month for them and grew
interests have vanished leaving no trace, and nothing remains of that
and horror he did not himself understand, aroused by the sight of that

impending battle, under a heading which he also read out:
the looking glass.
Andrew’s ears long after he had left the house.
life: belief in life and its enjoyment.
For three weeks the old prince lay stricken by paralysis in the new
heroes and rulers, but as the resultant of a multiplicity of variously
arouse his anger, now that he may perhaps remain with us such a short
“Yes, but it is hard for us to imagine eternity,” remarked Dimmler,
past the ladies into the little drawing room. With quick steps he went
at the officers.


as he called it. Twice during his career Kutúzov had been governor of

people who formed part of that municipality and under pretext of

lighted mirrors which repeated their reflections several times. Now
easily women can turn from sadness to joy, and how their moods depend
She looked timidly at her brother.
pursuing the Russian rearguard he came upon the left flank of the
“Oh, leave off!” said the accountant with a beaming but rather
Across the paper was scrawled in pencil, without capital letters,


lighting a fire.

lay with eyes open in the darkness, listening to the regular snoring

their sufferings. Deprived of power and authority, his crimes and his


presenting his fat shoulders.
to do it that it seemed to him as if it had really happened. Perhaps
in his pocket, folded up his papers, and called in Alpátych who had long
egged on against each other.
who had evidently just arrived, entered quickly, slamming the door.
The countess, who heard at once from the maids what had happened at the
the first to catch his eye. He sent him.
The first door on the left led into the princesses’ apartments. The
is all I can say.”
at her occasionally.
All turned their attention to the glow.
The French dragoon was a young Alsatian who spoke French with a German
men from various sides turned with surprise to see what this strange and
and glory to whoever captures him,’ he says. This is what his cajolery
evident he had reflected on this subject more than once, and he spoke



friend, stay here at the staff and tomorrow we’ll have a talk.”
Venetian mirror in the wall, and in her trodden-down shoes briskly

blamed,” he said, “both for that war and the peace... but everything
prisoners in a stable, had gone off to pillage their own stores, several


Courage. 6. Generosity. 7. The love of death.
listened attentively to the pilgrim.
be given.” To give that terrible order seemed to him equivalent to

persons, among them the elderly lady and Anna Pávlovna, did however
be thus boldly, provocatively happy.” “And what nonsense all this is

believe me, wouldn’t drink their vodka! ‘It’s not the day for that!’
cause of the confusion, turned away with indifference, as if to say,
Métivier out by the scruff of his neck because he is a Frenchman and
regiments, both cavalry and infantry, were by no means ready for the
“Father, tell me how it happened,” she asked through her tears.
Some forty Uhlans were drowned in the river, though boats were sent to
In the deep gaze that seemed to look not outwards but inwards there
the act of falling asleep. Rostóv lifted his head that had sunk almost
times has been presented in its whole tremendous significance.
the other committeemen. “There will be many toasts, it’s time to

After Prince Andrew’s engagement to Natásha, Pierre without any
tower from which, if he fell, he would have to fall for a whole day or a


knew that Dron, who had acquired property and was hated by the commune,

“A perfect picture! How he chased a fox out of the rank grass by the
orderlies of the wounded officers, after attending to their masters, had


couch or on the lounge chair in the drawing room and dozed there without

her, and immediately began to cry. The princess looked up at her. All
had been in attendance, considered young Prince Drubetskóy an invaluable
unpleasantly and he replied hastily.
crowd by the gate, gone up to a cart with a hood constructed of bast
without a battle, or by accepting battle to risk losing the army as well

the enemy’s fires, but heard the shouting of the French more loudly


words can be the immediate cause of the movements of millions of men.

herself.
“Go,” he said, nodding his head to Alpátych, and began questioning the
slight noise at the door to attract his attention, but Pierre did not
power and will to select one sequence of thoughts or events on which to
same fate.
characters and nations.
information. It followed that there must have been a victory. And at
they both tried to listen to the stern and dreadful choir that still
refuse Iogel and asked Sónya to dance. Denísov sat down by the old
at Natásha. The curtain had not yet risen and the overture was being
an example, walked about among the ranks, but he soon became convinced
prince, she prepared to listen.
right flank and drive it into the Bohemian mountains according to plan,
“To the Emperor.”
commanding.
Sónya’s thin little shoulders, Natásha’s eyes and laughter,
walk, we are unconscious of any contradiction. The degree of freedom and
all associated files of various formats will be found in:        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/0/2600/
there is no Petersburg for me, and that that must be settled first of
to the west, slaying their fellows.
represented by e, the very letter elided from the article le before the
What a delightful boy he was!”
fellow! What you have just said is good, very good. Of course you

miserable man who stood before him, but the task he had begun had to be
bathe.

might at any moment indulge in some freak, as he seemed much upset by
through it—set off with Ilyín in the lessening rain and the darkness
Dolgorúkov to the Emperor.

stranger, looking deeper and deeper into Pierre’s eyes. “And in
would then have said to me what he said the day he died. While talking
were forever washed away from his imagination and memory the agitating

remembered the Masonic vow in which each Brother promised to devote

the hill not to go beyond the stream, but Rostóv pretended not to hear
Consequently, it would only have been necessary for Metternich,
expressing disapproval and dislike of Kutúzov.
common good turned out to be useless and foolish—like Pierre’s and
Pierre looked up and saw at a window of the large house some Frenchmen
“Yes, the oak is right, a thousand times right,” thought Prince
“Ma chère, there is a time for everything,” said the countess with
hand, lay Prince Andrew Bolkónski bleeding profusely and unconsciously
as Frenchmen are, and was, as all Moscow said, an extraordinarily clever

in a hoarse broken voice, with an arm thrown round the nearest soldier.
they assure the officer on duty that they, the marshals, are on
nothing shameful in this reminder. “Call him in. His name is Vincent

enemy was the same as at Austerlitz and Friedland—yet the terrible
it. Were it not free it could not be limited. A man’s will seems to him
now,” thought Rostóv driving his spurs into Rook and letting him go
“Oh, you fool!” said the old man, spitting angrily. Some time passed
gold, of carts and horses, kept rising, but the value of paper money and
There was one pilgrim, a quiet pockmarked little woman of fifty called
finished learning, and then I will do something. I only pray God that
Milorádovich had not yet arrived with the militia, and for many other
good-natured smile at his coat and boots) “my things are worn out and I
historians (to the effect that Kutúzov hindered an attack) is unfounded,
French, collecting booty, cared only for gold. Not only was the
“Hallo, mate! Never again? Gave you a twist?” the Cossacks would banter
could remember it and weep or pray.
Simon were looking at him.
still looking silently at her brother and her beautiful eyes were full
“Natásha! Now it’s your turn. Sing me something,” they heard the
Vladímirovich is my mother’s second cousin. He’s also my Bóry’s



continually one after another with a deafening roar, enveloping the
was a victory, despite the assurance of generals that the battle was
“Come later.” And she went in, closing the door behind her.
He looked about him absently. Thousands of eyes were looking at him from
all the men, old and young, in uniform and evening dress, and all the
almost dragging him to the window. “That money is Denísov’s; you
detachment, moved from the place where it had spent the night, advancing
business!” and turning again to the narrator he began to laugh afresh.
“Well, everything is going to ruin! Robbery in the law courts, in the
“One thing I thank God for is that I did not kill that man,” said
stooped carefully with a supple and exact movement, picked up the ball,
“No, it’s not possible!” he cried aloud.
“But this is very important, from General Dokhtúrov,” said
“But I heard,” said Natásha. “Why does Mamma object?”
firm and resolute—they were those of Napoleon. He had just finished
fulfill Thy will?” And scarcely had she put that question than God
voice.
In 1811 there was living in Moscow a French doctor—Métivier—who had
was impossible for cavalry to act among the bushes and broken ground,
Denísov were his worst enemy, firmly fixed his eyes directly on his
Blood was gushing from its leg as from a spring. Among the limbers lay

an angry buzzing can sometimes be heard. Here and there a couple of
    CHAPTER XXIV
Nicholas overtook the first sleigh. They were driving downhill and
French would be destroyed. But neither the French nor the Russians made
man, and that in the duel with Bezúkhov, Pierre was right and Dólokhov
practical woman that she was, had even managed by favor with army
close by, who heard him muttering.

derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project

own family and valuables from his estate.
crossing his legs and glancing round.
and never will depend, on position, or equipment, or even on numbers,
his study telling her that if she did not go away it was all the same

Sixth Chasseurs whom they had just passed. Prince Andrew was struck by
held next day. Prince Andrew, as one closely connected with Speránski
brothers,” said he. “Mother Moscow, the white...” his voice faltered,

pale and breathless and his face was angry. One of his eyes was black,
the verge of a quarrel.
invitation to Anna Pávlovna’s reception and had sat listening to
attributing to it qualities of genius it does not possess. The best
one’s most distant past in which dreams and realities blend—and they

and without fuss or strain on his part this set things going.
short hair. This young man was dressed in a threadbare blue cloth coat

Pierre was the sixth to enter. He was conducted through a glass gallery,
the clearing from which Denísov had reconnoitered the French camp,
Dólokhov hurriedly interrupted.
gesticulated, shrugged his shoulders, and finally, without saying a word
is, and can be, no cause of an historical event except the one cause of
bee. But the ultimate purpose of the bee is not exhausted by the first,
parole, je n’ai pas voulu l’offenser. * I did not mean anything,
important person. “Come, Nicholas! You know you let me call you so?”
insurrection ever occur when the enemy entered a town. More than
holding Natásha’s hair.

the French assumed a still more tragic character, with men freezing,
returned to Petersburg quite crestfallen.
stayed with him during the whole of his imprisonment, but even grew in
width of the field, an enormous mass of cavalry in brilliant white

have secrets from your mother.”


bushes parted behind the hounds and Daniel’s chestnut horse appeared,
would have been clear and complete. One might believe or disbelieve
other’s hands. Napoleon’s face wore an unpleasant and artificial

contrary. What did it matter to him—who then alone amid a senseless

“Rides well, eh? And how well he looks on his horse, eh?”
of the third floor window with his legs hanging out.
from headquarters behind the village to the left, and thither Rostóv
Though no words had passed between Anatole and Mademoiselle Bourienne,


This wounded man was Prince Andrew Bolkónski.
gold snuffbox, which he took.
Just then Borís, with his courtierlike adroitness, stepped up to
arrest me for my civilian clothes? Surely not! He would understand on
order, too, could not possibly meet with any opposition.
staying the whole evening, I hope?”
significance of which is determined at a particular moment which arrives
There followed a momentary pause, which seemed very long to them all.
dancing. An aide-de-camp, the Master of Ceremonies, went up to Countess


hundred rubles each, and furniture, mirrors, and bronzes were being
of the war that had been announced in a manifesto, and about the
galloped full speed back again. The infantry moved in the same way,


Above the Kolochá, in Borodinó and on both sides of it, especially to
Bonaparte, and how badly the latter would fare now, especially if the
Alexéevich. This is what he noted in his diary:
caught up the object of contention and ran into the bedroom. The eldest
commander of the left flank of the infantry of the first army, a place,
Pierre told her the price.

pleasant with the invigorating freshness of the morning frost still in
awoke in Natásha’s soul.
servants say in a frightened whisper. “Catch hold from underneath.

he considered it necessary to hear to the end, probably to arouse the
close up to them. So many different eyes, old and young, were fixed
“Marry, marry, my boy!... A good family!... Clever people, eh? Rich,
“Drónushka,” she said, regarding as a sure friend this Drónushka who

“Who do you want, sir?” asked a voice in the darkness.
would be something unnatural, and as it seemed to him dishonorable, in
of slime that covered her soul and seemed to her impenetrable, delicate
Pierre saw that Borís wished to change the subject, and being of the

the cannon—still agitated as before by the thought of the Emperor and by
again it sounded as if someone were walking on detonators and exploding
be good as a Minister, but as a general he is not merely bad but
it necessary to tell Natásha of Prince Andrew’s wound and of his being

creaking of her corset as she moved. He did not see her marble beauty
up the whole of her thin, sickly face and made it beautiful. Her brother
frightened eyes and seemed merrier than usual. She understood hardly

haste to satisfy all their expectations.

sickness meant. Every night before lying down, he said: “Lord, lay me
“Oh goodness! What has happened? Really it was not my fault!”
“No, to kill a man is bad—wrong.”
and the prostrate adjutant, near a wormwood plant between the field and
trepidation in his benefactor’s lifetime. The room, dusty and untouched
from a man’s head.”
At this a sudden change evidently took place in the princess’ ideas;

consecutive series of commands corresponding to a series of events, and
before, some playing cards (there was plenty of money, though there was

her as a distant beauty far removed from him, as he had seen her every
yet.... How like he is growing, Mary!” he added, addressing Countess
life; and so despite his reluctance to remain in Moscow among people who
    CHAPTER XX
Count Rostóv’s mouth watered with pleasure and he nudged Pierre, but

sunbeams. In front, beyond a hollow dale, could be seen the enemy’s
For some thirty years Boguchárovo had been managed by the village Elder,

walls hung round with Persian carpets. The part of the room behind the

him. “Why? Tell me. You must tell me!”
thinking about the strangeness of what had occurred.

each step from the heel to the toe (she had on a new and favorite pair

Vorónezh in the middle of September. Princess Mary, having learned of
Till the Tsar reached it, each regiment in its silence and immobility
be confessed that Natalie is very susceptible.” This return to
have to call in the French, so that birds of a feather may fight
contrary to the restless confusion into which he felt himself being
smilingly at the recollection and turning to Makárin who gazed
untrue and irrational, but contrary to all human reality. To the
and when the regiment was put on war footing with an increase in
and thud was heard, followed by a boom of cannon blending into a dull
he looked at and listened to Willarski, it seemed strange to think that
once that his day was over, that his part was played, and that the power
steps should be taken to liberate the serfs, which the steward met by

been happy, weariness of life overcame him with its former intensity,
eyebrows which, when he frowned, sometimes hid the gleam of his shrewd,


face and narrow little eyes beamed with self-satisfied merriment. He
Natásha’s remark, but she did not express agreement in words.
repulsive than any other, because he imagines that he knows the



position of that insignificant individual was such as could certainly

hasten abroad with post horses.


desire to show his friend as soon as possible that he was now a quite
smile. Freemasonry is not a religious ceremonial sect, as I thought
princess, with the long waist and hair plastered down like a doll’s,
by one persistent thought. He did not know how or when this thought had
Borís felt that Pierre did not recognize him but did not consider
“The Lord be thanked, yes!”
due time. It was what the French called “le hourra de l’Empereur.”
    * “And hurrah for the whole world!”
something to Prince Andrew. Pierre went up to his friend and, asking
been able to analyze his feelings he would have found that his steady,
warm themselves, gathering round the fires throwing into the flames the


of his love for Natásha and his firm resolve to make her his wife.
“What’s in it?” asked Natásha.
Emperors get into boats, and saw how Napoleon—reaching the raft

was out of the question, “I am in love with your brother once for all
Prince Andrew said nothing to Túshin. They were both so busy as to seem
inhabitants, robbing them or stealing to provision the army, and fraud
Pávlovna had had a cough for some days. She was, as she said, suffering
the bonfire, and addressing Túshin asked him to have the guns moved a
particularly pleased her. She listened joyfully (as though she had not
Alexander and Napoleon, with the long train of their suites, approached
The commander of the company, with his eyes fixed on his superior,
some carriages waiting, and as soon as Pierre stepped out of the gate
been unable to pass because of a drunken crowd rioting in front of
crowd, and Pierre saw Karatáev whom he had not yet seen that morning.
To Pierre that smile said plainly: “I am well, but my health is now of
man punished who had allowed himself to seize a fox hunted by someone
her brother’s wound only from the Gazette and having no definite news of
there. Then, as happens to people of weak character, he desired so
from the hill. There was no one now between the squadron and the enemy
news.
“It’s all this mania for opposition,” he went on. “And who for? It is
where the ground was soft. The two borzois of the huntsman who had
Inhabitants of the city and villages, and you, workingmen and artisans,

rid them of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a great



Kutúzov looked wearily at him and, lifting his hands with a gesture of
room, where you will be ranged side by side with a court lackey and an
nowhere encountering the enemy. On the contrary, the soldiers became

the gesture of a man too busy to lose a moment, glanced at Kutúzov and,
decided to send the letters and money by the Grand Duke’s courier to
shan’t get away before evening. Look, look there.... Why, that must be



She only really took part when they recalled Sónya’s first arrival.
to drive straight home. But the nearer he drew to the house the more he
ride—to try a new horse Ilyín had bought and to find out whether there
artillery company, a head and shoulders taller and twice as broad
and sit in a mosque, so in Moscow he must be beneficent like the Tsars.


“No, you’ll never manage him that way,” said Anatole. “Wait a
saw everyone as in a dream. When I am taken up by a thought, all else is
said he, standing before Princess Mary and turning red, but not taking
the meaning of power, seem to consider that the collective will of
now leading him somewhere with unhesitating assurance on their faces
he had alluded to had happened a few days before—a fight between the
such conditions. You say I have begun this war! But who first joined his
“How like the brother is to the sister,” remarked the count. “And
“He? That’s a tradesman, that is to say, he’s the restaurant
standing still? Then why push?”
the Shevárdino mound to observe the enemy. On the twenty-fourth, we

at night on the first of September.
of languages, the respect shown him by the French, his simplicity, his
that were covered with sores—his footgear having long since fallen to

“May I call in that boy who was taken prisoner and give him something to
popular choice of Kutúzov as commander in chief was received.
his eye as a miller wakes up when the soporific drone of the mill wheel

in this house. Go! Don’t let me set eyes on you; beg her pardon!”

When they had been announced a perturbation was noticeable among the
which stood exactly the same kind of cakes in a silver cake basket as
“Russia’s ancient and sacred capital!” he suddenly said, repeating
destroy their army—it is quite clear that the battle of Tarútino, just

that passionate animal feeling which was apt to master him with great
on Natásha. Flushed and agitated she went about the house all that day,
Having said this, Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes, who, hat in

by so calling it they have explained its meaning. But such a war does
that separated the bridge from the Kalúga road, taking more than an
proceeding from the house.

time, wondered at his enjoyment and regretted that there was no one to
much as a sailor is by his ship. However far he has walked, whatever
their mother’s absence....”

a small trap straight to a spot reserved for him.
that were arriving from Russia. If Kutúzov decided to remain at Krems,

“And there hasn’t been anyone in the room except the lieutenant and
It really was Melyukóvka, and maids and footmen with merry faces came
on in front.
been ordered to attack Formínsk. But only Broussier had been there at


     * “The war must be extended widely. I cannot sufficiently
Natásha went up to the monk for his blessing, and he advised her to pray
“What a nice figure the policeman must have cut, my dear!” shouted
are the steppes of Asia! It’s a nasty country all the same. Au revoir,
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

“You think so?... Ah, I also wanted to ask you where our position is
me that you would not abandon Moscow without another battle; all this
“Yes, sit down!” said Dólokhov.

new officers arrived, new men and horses, and above all everybody was

preparations for war lay in the fact that Nicholas would not hear of
Tíkhon did not hear the slightest sound from the study after that.
the general knew. Having heard Rostóv to the end, the general shook his

On the ninth of August Prince Vasíli at Anna Pávlovna’s again met the
“And then, old fellow, he gives him one in the teeth with the butt

And without a word to his wife he went to the little sitting room and
Russia, but as it is I have to postpone my return for three months. You
adjutants general were there because they always accompanied the
battalion commanders who smilingly pressed forward (it was plain that
most legitimate questions humanity asks itself when it encounters the
before, but never so strongly as now. When similar doubts had assailed
count.
immediately fell asleep.
without any aim at self-sacrifice, and he therefore looked at what was
Napoleon did not notice that in regard to his army he was playing
guided the event.
(for they were speaking French) at least with a Russian who would, he
well as children, popped out from the back entrance to have a look at
filled with mournful sketches, maxims, and verses.
they command and the fewer of them there are; rising in this way from
“Yes, but between ourselves,” said the princess, “that is a
to the neighboring houses, from which wounded men began to come into the
from childhood. He has a heart of gold. I beg you, Natalie,” Prince
Perónskaya was quite ready. In spite of her age and plainness she



a whisper and four more Uhlans left the ranks and placed themselves on

hand; and the same feeling of pity, tenderness, and love took possession
As always happens when traveling, Princess Mary thought only of the
mats, and was speaking to a pale young officer who lay inside.
herself to her husband in her most becoming attitudes, or to avoid
On the first of September he had come to Moscow from the army.
or ribbon. For me tomorrow means this: a Russian army of a hundred
nowhere else for the family to talk but here at the ball. She did not
forces had been similarly drawn. On the twelfth of June, 1812, the
comme il faut, that’s a different matter; but the Kurágins’ set of

“We can harness at once, your excellency.”
“Papa! Here’s Berg coming to see us,” said she, looking out of the
ourselves to risks we must not risk our children.”
known that it was costing him a thousand rubles, and that he would not
“Oh, you don’t understand anything! Don’t talk nonsense, just
or a child?...”

talking on all sides.
“The past always seems good,” said he, “but did not Suvórov
consider yourself incapable and your life a spoiled life. You have
“Oh, you only spoil things for me. All right, go, go!”
words; his face twitched and the calf of his left leg began to quiver
“Why are they leaving the town?” asked Alpátych.
“Why, this gentleman’s saber.”
“It will interest you,” said he.
over closer to him, paused for an instant as if asking herself whether

this condition of stupor since the morning, when Sónya, to the surprise
took her old ball dress, and fell into a reverie quite unrelated to what
questions: Where was he going? How was he wounded? Was it serious? And
stands on guard for the old view, and accuses the new view of subverting
When the adjutant reminded him of the prisoner, he jerked his head in
from corporal punishment, and could not avoid expressing it by cries of
On the fourth day fires broke out on the Zúbovski rampart.
seemingly increased in inverse proportion to the square of the distance
stand still and it was necessary to live. Hard as it was for Princess


fathers of the Society of Jesus?”
“I shall not be at peace till you promise me this.”
“Hardly,” said Bagratión. “I saw them this evening on that
roused by activity, expected the best results from the new campaign,
up childish and mendacious plans of how he would have made mankind happy
evident duty.” She paused. All were silent, expectant of what was to
room, and his valet was buttoning on to the back of his breeches a

“And I’ll go to my ruin, I will, as soon as possible! It’s not
in society, nor as he had for a long time, and at one time rapturously,

Livonian gentleman should propose marriage to a Countess Rostóva; but
woke Sónya and told her what she had done. The necessary antidotes had

a Jesuit à robe courte * was presented to her, and in the garden by the
sun. How beautiful the sky looked; how blue, how calm, and how deep!
through him, and again laughed his frigid laugh.
their former disharmony and her own jealousy recurred to her mind.

Nicholas dismounted, and with Natásha and Pétya, who had ridden up,

had fallen the previous day—the day of the battle. Reviewing his
the welfare of the charitable and educational institutions under her
and handsome young man and woman for one another. And this human feeling
advanced into Prussia sooner, then things would have taken a different

genealogical tree, shook his head, laughing as a man laughs who looks at
“Oh, if only he would come quicker! I am so afraid it will never be!

distressed, and breathed painfully, but could not restrain the wild
how could he speak like that in her presence? The only explanation was
While they were talking in undertones the crack of a shot sounded
Just then a closed carriage and another with a hood drove up to the
did not win. The profoundest and most excellent dispositions and orders
congratulations and happy faces, announcing the trophies taken, the
proceeding as usual. Denísov, who had been losing at cards all night,
sent for a senior officer. Getting out of his calèche, he waited with
or the gallows!”

soldiers held him while two others were flourishing their switches and
contrary to them because quite different subjects were talked about at
he passed it. Pierre began to feel a sense of uneasiness, and the
During one of these pauses Kutúzov heaved a deep sigh as if preparing to
officer Bagratión.
to say, all that could be got out of them.
eyes and indicating Hélène with a sorrowful gesture. “Ah, she is
playing a Viennese waltz on the clavichord, while a fourth, lying on
pressed him still harder with proofs of the impossibility and above all
Hélène smiled, with a look implying that she did not admit the
in face of her sorrow. Without any need of self-restraint, no wish to


countess had not yet come. But now steps were heard at the door, steps

Nicholas, but had never learned music or thought about it, and so the
    CHAPTER IV
swinging their arms and keeping time spontaneously, marched with long
to do everything possible to take his son to him, and so she prepared
themselves losing four, so that on the one side four and on the other
“My dear benefactor! This is what I expected from you—I knew your
Mary did not frighten them (she never inspired fear in anyone), but they
might easily succeed to the post; how popular he was with everyone in



with a pair of sleek roans, exactly like those of a certain prince. He


the next higher and smaller section of the cone consists of the next
impossible, it’s awful!” She looked into her lover’s face and saw
The Service before everything. Thanks, thanks!” And he went on

dependence on cause.

undress, drink some water, and send for the doctor.
square in front of the Bazaar were drummers beating the muster call.
faces for the most part only expressed the fact that they found it very
CHAPTER X
than a man who has been looking at a tuft of steppe grass through the

aloft, and again repeated his long-drawn cry, “A-tu!” (This call and

When he came level with the Foot Guards he noticed that about them and
“Je vous aime!” * he said, remembering what has to be said at such
house, you know, and danced with the children. Be sure to invite him, my
and illimitable within him and that limited and material something that
Nesvítski with a laugh threw his arms round Prince Andrew, but
“If Prince Andrew heard that I was in the power of the French! That
dressers.

frantically, had such an effect that they managed to squeeze through
all her clothes in Petersburg and that heaven knew what she would have
for five weeks, and then suddenly, with no fresh reason, fled back:
eyes with such an enraptured caressing look that it seemed strange to be
related to the will of one or of several men who have decreed it.
great deal from the deceased,” said Prince Vasíli to him, handing him
“I shan’t be violent, don’t be afraid!” said Pierre in answer to a
before his Old Guards, renounced the throne and went into exile. Then
“Véra,” she said to her eldest daughter who was evidently not a
still-green, thickly growing oats, and at other quite black fields just
any action, as it was not clear to him now what he ought to do. He had

imagination Natásha this time gave him a different answer. She stopped
not only to herself, to be near her brother who was perhaps dying, but

replied, “and it is that He would be merciful to him and would allow
suddenly find that we are not in Otrádnoe, but in Fairyland. And then I
Abbé Morio? He is a most interesting man.”
“So it seems you’re a hero, eh? Come now, what was this duel about?
CHAPTER II
Tsarévich, who could not forget his disillusionment at Austerlitz, where

mentioned that Prince Andrew was among the wounded traveling with them;
have liked to sympathize with what Pierre was saying, but could not.
between a man who says that the people of the West moved on the East


due to her misfortune. When conversation turned on her husband Hélène
CHAPTER V
shadows round his eyes, alone sat in his place barefoot and not dressed.

joy at the approach of the Emperors. One voice was heard shouting:
with peasants and peasant women, gentlemen’s country houses, fields
Princess Mary and Natásha, who did not leave him, felt this. They did
again every time she shook herself and moved toward the wood where she
Moscow are elated by enthusiasm for our adored Emperor.
another, dying, stepping over the dying and killing one another, only to
immortally victorious name on the Pyramids, would affect this enfant du
“Well, Michael Mítrich, sir?” he said, addressing one of the

Not merely in these cases but continually did that old man—who by
CHAPTER I
revealed to me. Adonai is the name of the creator of the world. Elohim
CHAPTER XXVI
arm and only then was he able to relate what had happened to him.
if we occupy the villages of Sokolnitz and Kobelnitz, whereby we

Platón Karatáev knew nothing by heart except his prayers. When he began

awful!”

declaration, listened to him in silence and then told her son that he
“What does this fellow want?” shouted one of them referring to Pierre.

vous aime’?” he kept repeating to himself. And when he had said it
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
And yet it is difficult to imagine an historical character whose

business. She felt he had a world apart, which he loved passionately and

himself up, slightly arching his back. It was plain that the commander
the time seemed merely strange to Pierre: he felt he could not grasp its
gave it, losing a quarter of his army and lengthening his lines of
of the First Class and the Emperor showed him the highest honors, but

Inside the shed Alpátych and the coachman arranged the tangled reins and
away and attend to your father with your own unpracticed, awkward hands,

handkerchief, and pipe.
black eyebrows and the extraordinarily soft, bright color of her long,
like a physical wound is sometimes fatal and sometimes heals, but always
to him was solely due to Napoleon.
Willarski was a married man with a family, busy with his family affairs,
“You are joking,” replied Pierre, growing more and more excited.

knocked three of them over.

Natásha whose radiant, happy expression—of which he was conscious
over, the adjutant he had seen the previous day ceremoniously informed
“Matvévna’s” carriage. At the foot of the hill, a pale hussar

madman who did not know what he was doing.”

significantly.

my people? Have they reached Moscow at last?” he asked seriously.
and a flask, and Nesvítski was treating some officers to pies and real


“Wait—just a word! When he has been transferred to the Guards...”
personages does not in most cases produce any effect, that is to say,

she was with Sónya. Sónya had cried and begged to be forgiven and now,
estates.”
defile through narrow village streets when we are marching against the
to be talking to a staff officer of such importance. “It’s a lovely
in strengthening their friendship. Denísov evidently tried to expose

ague.
Redoubt opposite, which had been ours the day before and where several
Borís had overheard it.

taking out what she was holding inside it, as if what she held were


just returned from abroad where he had been educated, and this was his
magnate was at first as much taken aback by this suggestion of marriage
degree embarrassing for the Russians, as the most adroit diplomatists of
death, and Prince Andrew died.

she was bewitching and that he loved her. During the écossaise, which
Soldiers! The Russian army is advancing against you to avenge the
the meaning of her excited, resolute, unnatural look the day before
had noticed on many of the faces he had met came into his face.
discipline, if you allow a subordinate to address you like that!’ It

collar which he had arranged so well at home to seem like a man’s.

“Call him to me,” said Kutúzov.
“So you are not afraid to play with me?” repeated Dólokhov, and as
that rigid position.
I got up late. On waking I lay long in bed yielding to sloth. O God,

shared with all her heart in the prayer for the spirit of righteousness,
she termed Bennigsen. She saw that they grew spiteful when they spoke to
il n’y a qu’un pas.

During the third night the countess kept very quiet for a few minutes,
toward the vanguard. Before he came up with the hussars, several
dragging away boards, dry wood, and thatch from the roofs, for the
Bilíbin wrinkled up the skin over his eyebrows and pondered, with a
bridges over the Niemen, deafened continually by incessant and rapturous
their commander in chief.
still in the same place, his stout body resting heavily in the saddle
The second consideration is the more or less evident time relation of
feverish delirium or drunkenness.
the Vilkavisski forest and flowing over the three bridges thrown across
“My carriage!” he said.
the prisoners had seen in front of them during the first days was
convinced themselves that the hounds had separated into two packs: the

seized by an unreasoning panic—it occurred to him that the child was
“You, my little countess, are a notorious spendthrift,” said the
The countess took Princess Mary into the drawing room, where Sónya was
attacks. Both generals are angry, and the result is a challenge on
turn: that a court-martial had been appointed, and that in view of the
“Count!” exclaimed the timid yet theatrical voice of Vereshchágin in the
Had he not established schools and hospitals and liberated his serfs?
people who talk like that either do not know what they are talking about
at his expense, and a priest was paid to teach reading and writing to
“It’s a complicated story, you know,” said the adjutant. “That
battery; two guns were smashed and cannon balls fell more and more
before she was married, but then came the maneuvers, and considerations

from the post and began pushing it into the pit.
sensibly and quietly with one another.
than, anyone he had met before, and above all better than himself.
After these words, the Mason, as if tired by his long discourse, again
themselves to someone younger. On all these faces, as on the faces
traveler, also detained for lack of horses.
    CHAPTER XVII
thoughts.

be taken, but the command of the armies became still more confused and

“Not unto us, not unto us, but unto Thy Name!... I too am a man like the
Natásha, with her surprise, her delight, her shyness, and even her
“Just look at the master! A regular eagle he is!” loudly remarked
Dólokhov’s clear, cold glance met Rostóv as soon as he entered the
was the little princess, these tears, the cause of which she did not
Rostóv spurred his horse, called to Sergeant Fédchenko and two other
undercurrents were acting strongly and nearing an eruption.
In her absence Nicholas allowed himself to give his little daughter a
simple, while what they proposed was so complicated and clever, that


more that she with such a soul not only belonged to him but was part of

Rostóvs’ yard. Many of the wounded asked them not to unload the carts

Gentleman of the Bedchamber, which at that time conferred the status of
badness of the road from Petersburg to Moscow and of his Petersburg
boy ran after them angrily, as if vexed that their program had been
attending to trifles, went past Natásha and Pétya who were trying to
“Then why are you crying? I am happy for your sake,” said Princess Mary,
that...” And remembering his former tenderness, and looking now at his

Kírsten. The staff captain on his broad-backed, steady mare came at a

their meaning but must keep them. The second pair of man’s gloves
restrain those... those... yes, those exploits of antique valor,” he

room with parcels under their arms.

seemed impossible. “But perhaps they may do it!” For more than ten
was such a thing as “landlord’s corn” which was sometimes given to the
He took some gold pieces from his trouser pocket and put them on the
her,” he said.
The Rostóvs’ monetary affairs had not improved during the two years
his uncomfortable habits was to blame for the condition of the family
the boyars had already taken definite shape in his imagination. That
valor carry disorder and confusion into the enemy’s ranks, but should
found in it a new enjoyment.
Bourienne says he has been asking about you....”

their greatcoats were ranged in lines, the sergeants major and company
has promised to come this evening.”

it.
always accompanied any reference of hers to the Imperial family, “has
barrels on her arms. You know not a day passes now without some new
The friends were silent. Neither cared to begin talking. Pierre
that Prince Andrew could not refuse to stay to dinner. “Yes,”
The command of the left flank belonged by seniority to the commander of

request that he would take no part in the matter, Rostóv agreed to be
More than anything else in Pierre’s story the captain was impressed by
to his cheek. But she stepped back immediately. All the force of the


agriculture, or slay their fellow creatures.
his friend Obolénski had lately, in secret, agreed to join the hussars.
He did not finish what he wished to say.
farther still.
banquet. On his way back, he noticed Rostóv standing by the corner of a
displeased by the substance of his speech, which had even been forgotten

facts.
covered his eyes with his hand and pressed von Toll’s hand.
their orders, like Napoleon’s, were seldom carried out, and then but
You need only forget to ask how the will of heroes produces events, and

introduced him to his guests, explaining that he was not a civilian, but
something big, that splashed into the water.
and down the room. He understood what she was weeping about, but could
placed his hand on the gate as if to leave.
The Russian military historians in so far as they submit to claims
place, and so on—as if anything more than A’s or B’s satisfaction
“Whatever happens to you,” he said, “you must bear it all manfully
believing in the possibility of goodness and truth, but of seeing the
as if stirred to his heart’s core and himself regretting and laughing
his red nose, stepped forward from the crowd as if expecting the Emperor


handicraft, gardening, or anything else you please. But why intellectual

to press so painfully on her heart, it gradually faded into the past,
    * “Lancers of the 6th Regiment.”
the Kolochá, a mist had spread which seemed to melt, to dissolve, and to
bands for us. Well, never mind.”

spoke of most ordinary things, yet she felt that they were closer to

    CHAPTER XIX
reluctant to be left alone with his friend, asked them to stay and have
spilled on dry ground both the dry ground and the water disappear and

in a most dejected state of mind amid Denísov’s hospital comrades,
he would not make peace so long as a single armed Frenchman remained on
difficulty out of the front door.
courage and endurance—acknowledged even by the enemy—with which the
rather short, as if surprised that anyone should not know him.
    CHAPTER II
flight. Here and there among the cells containing dead brood and honey
on his thin bony legs, and keeping on a worn, nankeen-covered, sheepskin

consciousness that something great and mysterious was being accomplished
to the boy. He grew silent, and quiet ensued for a moment, terrible to
discovery that he did so delighted them.

Pierre looked again at the companion’s pale, delicate face with its
well, never mind, here you are.”
sure that everyone was submissive, but that all the same it was dull,
downhill and uphill, across a ryefield trodden and beaten down as if by
Kutúzov with his staff and all of us count for nothing. Everything is


Captain,” and he turned to a thin, dirty little artillery officer who
distress at the dead body with its long, thin, half-severed neck and its
may not have seen, but I have seen, how good men brought up in those
the liveliness of a fourteen-year-old boy, and yet it was the face
    CHAPTER IX
that the various operations necessary to free her from her husband

Prince Andrew laughed disagreeably, again reminding one of his father.
Pierre now understood the count’s dissatisfaction with the wording of
the yell the officer turned round, and at the same moment Pierre threw
him not in the least abashed.

unconsciously lifted the upper lip of his pretty little mouth just
toward the sofa she had indicated. As soon as Anna Mikháylovna had
From one open shop came the sound of blows and vituperation, and just
would be agreeable to his hearer since it went to prove his, Napoleon’s,
peasants, did not bring their hay to Moscow for the high price offered
considered it desirable to be in alliance (a conviction he repeatedly
not, and never did, like Speránski personally, but I like justice!”
unharnessed cart where there was nobody. Tucking his legs under him and
recalled all this as childishness he had left immeasurably behind.
her and screamed:
changing his tone or attitude, “it must seem to you that everyone is
impatient and sets to work himself and finds letters from the Emperor


desire, but there was pity for her feminine and childish weakness, fear
‘There are a lot of us,’ he says, ‘but all poor stuff—only soldiers in
prisoners had been captured.

to fight a battle ‘on his own hand’ as the Germans say. He does so.
Highness who everybody said possessed powers such as no man had ever had
had taken place in herself. From the moment she recognized that dear,
girl might have done.

His will; but tell me, Michaud, how did you leave the army when it
and repay all that the family had done for her by breaking off her
touched her hand as she did not reply.
blessedness. And such a state of obligatory and irreproachable idleness
of which her singing had been an unusually powerful part. She gave it up
at his estate. As regularity is a prime condition facilitating activity,
up her sleeves still higher. Pierre approached, looking at her in a
stepped to the middle of the room and stood still.
“I shall probably die before you. So remember, these are my memoirs;
seemed to say. She saw her husband, but did not realize the significance
a slightly contemptuous smile, he said: “Yes, there are many stories
pay homage to her. Napoleon Bonaparte was despised by all as long as he
in Petersburg” was so well established that no one took his freaks
which was talked of in the town, and was it true? Pierre laughed and
then he did everything so simply and with such assurance!) Mademoiselle
Pierre felt uncomfortable and even depressed in his friend’s company
If the Emperor pleases to recognize Bonaparte as Emperor and to conclude
a smile he could not repress as he recalled his reception at Brünn.

He touched his horse and having called Milorádovich, the commander of
smile and said: “Poor fellows, they don’t know that I am leaving them
under present circumstances a formal betrothal was, of course, not to be
Petersburg on the tenth of August, and her son, who had remained in
“Because he is young, because he is poor, because he is a relation...

the subject of history, while free will itself is the subject of
he will always say the right thing and say it well.
Whether it was the wine he had drunk, or an impulse of frankness, or the
“Rugáy, here’s a pad for you!” he said, throwing down the
personal grief; they wept with a reverent and softening emotion which

of profound wisdom.
having said this laughed. Everyone turned toward him.
me... I confess it. For some reason you wish to deprive me of our former
a battery to their left. The smoke above it had not yet dispersed. Two
of her most august Majesty the Empress Márya Fëdorovna. Pierre felt
he been doing all this time?”
“Ah, Nicholas, do you know I am often troubled about little Nicholas,”
These words he repeated to everyone without exception or variation, and
you daughter of a bitch!” said Karatáev, touching the dog that lay at
at the soldiers who were blocking his way. “Hi there, boys! Keep to
“There will be room for everybody, this is a big house. Oh, what a
so doing we should destroy the very conception of man in the case we are


has since lived peaceably and harmlessly in society seems less guilty


nor the burning of Moscow nor anything else could seem of importance to


If the conception of freedom appears to reason to be a senseless
and Pierre especially, for he reminded him of all the painful moments of
This longing to distinguish themselves, to maneuver, to overthrow, and
these transfers, a more than usually complicated play of parties
orders—as the historians tell us—to retreat by the Smolénsk road.
And the count turned to the cook, who, with a shrewd and respectful
address to a mounted infantryman) and riding up to Rostóv, he burst out
not to notice one another. When having limbered up the only two cannon


officer fell, not so much from the blow—which had but slightly cut his
Rostóv gazed at what was happening before him as at a hunt. He felt
“For tomorrow!” said he, quickly finding the page and making a
men was training a trotter of his own for a race. He knew a lady on one
For him it was no new conviction that his presence in any part of

They were silent awhile.
Stone Bridge, were Ney’s troops and transport.

one I’d give my life for her! But those!...” and he made a gesture
shyness that surprised him for an instant.
spoke of their future life. Prince Andrew was afraid and ashamed to
an argument which was embarrassing for his companion. “If you will
    CHAPTER IX
affairs, which they all agreed in approving, Prince Andrew began to

“Directly! Directly! And you, Mamma?”
(without knowing what he was jesting at) when he saw that the Massacre
Danube, marching on us, you, and your lines of communication.”
of the other hospital patients, but it was not this that struck Rostóv.
have with the actual fact of slaughter and violence: why because the
“Well, what would you do?” asked Denísov.
in her eyes and her lips curved with a strange smile.
and Charles I are executed by their people? To this question historians
indeed get somewhere, though not to their right places; a few eventually
Borís blushed.

“Well, little countess; that’s it—come on!” cried “Uncle,”
Denísov’s horse, Bedouin, was in debt all round, to his comrades and
paces of it. As if aware of her danger, the wolf turned her eyes on
go!”
turned to the right and came out onto the highroad at Krásnoe. And here
tomb of the little princess, and in this chapel was a marble monument

“What for?” asked Alpátych.

white horse, was Prince Bagratión. Prince Andrew stopped, waiting for
stopped in front of Balashëv. Balashëv noticed that his left leg was
she knew let her have the keys of the catacombs, and how she, taking


us and the merchants. Millions will pour forth from there”—he pointed
shifting the baby he gave him to the nurse.
“He must keep order, keep the law, that’s what the government is there
to his own.
was lost. No one whom Rostóv asked could tell him where the Emperor

feeling that in the main it was going badly.
“Well!” he said, turning to his wife.
his wealth, and being in the habit of lording it over these people, he

“I hear,” Dron answered without lifting his eyes.
A broad staircase led straight up from the entry, and to the right he
Pétya, rapidly turning his head, looked now at the drummer boy, now
on earth is worrying me?” he asked himself as he rode back from the
abreast.
at first irregularly at varying intervals—trata...tat—and then more
corpses, and the French soldiers, after dispatching the wounded, threw
habits of the military? The aim of war is murder; the methods of war
“I am speaking ze truce,” replied the hussar with a smile.

CHAPTER III
her, and sometimes I think she doesn’t feel it as you or I would.”
a church who, availing themselves of the absence of the chief
And as usual when speaking of Pierre, she began to tell anecdotes of his

there was danger, he had hopes of the effect of this last medicine and
have the pistol.”
oppose no reasonable ideal to the insensate Napoleonic ideal of
skeleton, with a stern sallow face and eyes intently fixed on Rostóv.
Virgin’s Field, to the left of the nunnery, as far as a kitchen garden
on both sides. Behind our position was a steep and deep dip, making it
liberty, and for equality. People ceased to kill one another, and
him.”
Prince Andrew involuntarily watched as one does watch the hands of
the attainment of the historic, universal, aims of humanity. A deed done
sound of his opponent’s voice.

and cross by its three bridges, advancing to the same heights as
down, he was surprised by the beauty of those ruins. The picturesqueness
had first wanted to effect a diversion in Greece and then in Warsaw but
as a petitioner on behalf of this young man. You see...” but
intrigue did not now occupy the old man’s mind. One terrible question
was being mown down by the soldiers, evidently for fodder. This fact
self-sacrifice and so on; but in the army which retired beyond Moscow


a most serious, deferential, and innocent expression.
the Emperor by his aides-de-camp. This idea was eagerly received.
“It’s the enemy?... No!... Yes, see it is!... for certain.... But
cakes; only one thing was lacking that he had always seen at the evening
An interpreter rode up to the group.
declivity to his right. He looked in that direction, but though the
into the wing and put him in the room that had been Madame Schoss’.
“Eh, books, books!” said another peasant, bringing out Prince Andrew’s
features, and then she saw his face and met his gaze.

face was calm, gentle, and happy. Clutching her breast to keep herself
for life, but I don’t understand that, I forget quickly.”
Having prepared everything necessary for the party, the Bergs were ready
“Thank you... daughter dear!... for all, for all... forgive!... thank
give a ruble to anyone who found a hare.
people combine in a certain formation in which they all take part, and
at his comrades who were paying no attention to him, and he moaned
Moscow during the holidays to amuse himself. Nicholas guessed what his
“That is perfectly true. And I am sorry I went to see him and took
of his conduct and repenting of it, Rostóv, with downcast eyes, was
captivity was gradually led on to do so.
“Yes, most precious... a royal word,” said Count Rostóv, with a sob. He
find a better opportunity.”

“Even then he wanted to tell me what he told me the day he died,” she
leaving them alone, and Anatole had taken her hand and said in a tender
PROCLAMATION
occupied by Borís and Zhilínski.
“Why are you going? I know you think it your duty to gallop back to
thirteen look at the boy they are in love with and have just kissed for
In consequence of this battle Kutúzov received a diamond decoration,
some of our infantry were seen to move forward, words of approval
Bolkónski and Denísov moved to the gate, at which a knot of soldiers
neither I nor my mother would ever ask or take anything from him.”
much on the fact that the news had arrived on the Emperor’s birthday as

pledge!”
our transgressions and iniquities! Create in us a clean heart and renew
Véra’s remark was correct, as her remarks always were, but, like
smile on his lips. “What a pity I’ve missed Uncle! What a nice old
Pierre looked at Rostopchín with naïve astonishment, not understanding
to the merchants’ hall—“but our business is to supply men and not spare
file—of whom there are always the greatest number; of the next higher
fear would prevent her understanding any of her father’s further
a restrained swagger which would have been ridiculous had he not been

or another peasant would have to explain to him that it is not the devil
experience of life had reached the conviction that thoughts and the
rendered, and I supplied them with a doctor, a hospital, and an asylum
all understood that the war was not ended.
saying.
had seen Anna Semënovna.

forgive me.” Pierre involuntarily glanced at the loose button. “And if
mother’s remarks were leading to and during one of these conversations

bears!...”

raisins, fine ones; you know, seedless ones. We have a new sutler and
from the ranks. A morose soldier marching on the left turned his eyes on
who had rescued Pétya was talking to a functionary about the priests who

the staff captain in his deep bass, calmly stroking his long mustache.

done in the realm of history did not concern him at all.
his knees close up to his head and one shoulder higher than the other.

in time and himself takes part in what occurs.
Napoleon’s army felt this and the invasion moved on by its own momentum.
“There was one like that,” said the doctor, as if pleased. “That
manly voice interrupting them both. “Of course you artillery men are
Pierre smiled absent-mindedly, evidently not grasping what she said.

Just as “Uncle’s” pickled mushrooms, honey, and cherry brandy had
saw the great mass of Muscovites who had donned uniform and were talking

have rescued her from the fire. But this is a monster and neither a
of that man’s will to the Deity, history cannot without contradictions
of the trees on the boulevard, the sounds of the band and the white
thing there. He stood still, looking silently around. He had not at all

order what can be executed. But to know what can and what cannot be
led along a certain carpet. After that they took his right hand, placed
might mean, but thanks to this letter Nicholas suddenly became almost as

so on. Then a place was assigned to Pierre, he was shown the signs of
were beds in these rooms and the sick and wounded officers were lying or

into many. Each drop tried to spread out and occupy as much space as
off their belts.
countess, and Natásha sat down beside a little chess table with Sónya,
is the problem of history.
away.
his feelings were like those of a conjuror who always expects his trick
to the dogs; one in a red cap, the other, a stranger, in a green coat.
her—thou or you?”
In the middle of the day Murat sent his adjutant to Napoleon to demand
still kept awake at night so as not to miss the proper time when the
own army had melted away to half before reaching Krásnoe and a whole
proverb says,” remarked Shinshín, moving his pipe to the other side
of men can do without the conception of power, the existence of power is
that he would go away without having sold his three roans to the Polish
found words he had long been seeking.
To avoid unpleasant encounters with the old man, the natural method was
publican to the smith and back again as if considering whom he ought to

his cheerfulness was not infectious as it used to be: on the contrary it
speak of it. Natásha shared this as she did all his feelings, which she
again when he passed to another group whose center was the abbé.
that explained their teaching by hieroglyphics. A hieroglyph,” said
“To your places!” cried the young officer to the men gathered round

loud rattle of the door handle struck painfully on her ears. Dunyásha,

fingers.
future.
Christmas? Do you remember what I saw?”
arm wavered still more with the strain. One hand moved as if to clutch
want to, but now I have no time.” Besides, it seemed to him that the


said that if Pierre absolutely insisted on passing for a Russian let it

again, under Hélène’s influence, what had seemed terrible now seemed
as usual. Despite their pale swollen faces and tattered uniforms, the
asked Denísov.
“Why are you crying, Mamma?” asked Véra. “From all he says one
the ground, proved quite useless. The mining of the Krémlin only helped
Vasíli severely. “You don’t know what you are doing.”
wheels and pulleys is merely a slow and regular movement of the
glanced vacantly around her, and seeing Natásha began to press her
“Get him to his place and give him some water,” said Rostóv,
and impossible, he again glanced timidly at her. She did not sit down

“Where is he?” he inquired. And as he spoke he saw a young man coming
did not seem that those living in it aimed at keeping it spotless—but


buy. But he liked them; liked that mad driving at twelve miles an hour,
Ney, who came last, had been busying himself blowing up the walls of
pass the three officers quite easily, but Zherkóv, pushing Nesvítski
Mikháylovich Speránski. He manages everything. I’ll speak to him. He
peace with you. As for the Swedes—it is their fate to be governed by
Boguchárovo, a homestead had been looted by French marauders.
men who did not wish to commit them, it was as if the mainspring of
acquaintances, who had so often dined and danced at his house and had so
problems in higher mathematics, turning snuffboxes on a lathe, working

most beautiful of them all, our Márya Antónovna! And how simply she
CHAPTER III
up to the window of the first house, when a familiar voice called him by

understand. That’s what I’m up to.”
the ranks.
He paused and rubbed his face and eyes with his hands.

that his remarks were too enthusiastic and emphatic for the occasion and

the pretext. When she wanted to be agitated, Nicholas and his health
“The general orders them all to be driven out at once, without fail.
Nicholas’ career and am heartless and ungrateful, while truly... God
march there and there,” and so on; and on paper, all these columns
At the bridge they all halted, waiting for those in front to get across.
here in a minute...” voices were suddenly heard saying; and officers,
this life I did not and do not understand.”

going on in front. Whether all the enemy forces were, as we supposed,
The servant brought back his tumbler turned upside down, * with an
you!” came from different sides.
and knew that the chief way to make them obey is to show no suspicion
“You know Bilíbin—he’s a very clever fellow. He suggested

They gave Prince Andrew some tea. He drank it eagerly, looking with
putrefaction and hospital air. On the stairs he met a Russian army

things. Dólokhov was counting the money and noting something down.

known). Drawing nearer, he recognized in the Rhetor a man he knew,
cut!”
On reaching the village he dismounted and went to the nearest house,
distinguished him from everyone else in that drawing room.



Napoleon walked about in front of his tent, looked at the fires and
CHAPTER VI
the portrait. “It is too soon for him to see a field of battle.”

that Moscow is called ‘Holy Moscow’? How many churches are there in
of unknown, infinitely small, quantities. Abandoning the conception
everything is calculated, and I don’t like that. But Denísov...”

“Teach me what I should do, how to live my life, how I may grow good
shame on his breast.
one side of the road. The cavalry regiment, as it descended the hill
myself, if I fall asleep it’s finished. And then I am used to not
him, immediately all submitted to him. But the Allied monarchs were

    CHAPTER V
Natásha did not answer her questions.
governesses, lived three miles from the Rostóvs.
him not to forget to procure all the things he undertook to buy, and he
said she.
father... It’s bad....” he reflected, but while he was thinking this
It was a war for a great cause, the end of uncertainties and the

his lifted hand with a bright and proud smile.
“So that’s what she is like; what a fool I have been!” he thought
Pierre who was under such obligations to him (“But never mind that”)
by the disorderly movement of the Russian columns, and from all
Natásha’s face, leaning out of the window, beamed with quizzical

naval uniform, with a dirk, and holding his cap under his arm, he handed

familiar voice. “One is afraid of the unknown, that’s what it is.
“It’s very nice, your excellency! Wouldn’t you like to?” said he.
and shouted rudely at the Russian general, asking: was he deaf that
liked upsetting a driver or running down a pedestrian, and flying at
“No, stop!” said Anatole. “Shut the door; we have first to sit down.
By discarding a claim to knowledge of the ultimate purpose, we shall
Sophie, the rosy, laughter-loving, youngest princess with the mole,
The count, laughing, nudged the blushing Sónya and pointed to her
Pelagéya, turning to Princess Mary for support.

At the council at Filí the prevailing thought in the minds of the

“Oh, that would be so dread...” she began and, prevented by agitation
swooped down,” said the woman, pointing to the French soldiers.

discussed our interests like one family, and have rendered account to

declaring that only his courage and good luck made such a feat possible:
mind. “If a tenth part of his detachment returns I shall thank God,”
“Vienna considers the bases of the proposed treaty so unattainable
“All right—all right. I haven’t time just now,” replied Ermólov, and
about M. Dessalles, whom he had brought from abroad to be his son’s
“Oh, quicker, quicker! To get back to that time and have done with all
One. “Oh, this senseless life of ours!” thought Nicholas. “All
reflections. And experience tells us that power is not merely a word but
no hindrance to loyalty, and that he was ready to... While
fear and concealing it from the doctor, she agreed to Natásha’s wish and
“Your regiment fulfilled its duty honorably,” said Napoleon.
and stopped near him.
Emperor—and but one fear—to fail to please him. The result of that
longer his nor did he wish for it. He felt that his way of life had now

“Oh, it would be a terrible loss, she is an enchanting woman.”
life, and can’t, for I know no other. But think, Andrew: for a young
retreating to our frontier—which do today.’
a heavenly feeling. Borís was telling his new friend Pierre who the
point. Ask Denísov whether it is not out of the question for a cadet to


Karáy was a shaggy old dog with a hanging jowl, famous for having
The prince’s tone was so calm and confident that Princess Mary
crowd turned toward him and pressed round him. Those who stood nearest
“Yes, I shall be very glad to see him. Is he quite well?”

continually sought to find—the aim of life—no longer existed for
him. And Tíkhon, purposely writhing and making faces, pretended to be
as they said in Moscow society. He seemed to be condescending to


might help her.
tried to excuse Pierre and suggested reasons for his delay in returning.

Rostóv took the purse in his hand, examined it and the money in it, and
soldiers running in confused crowds across his path.
Borís was among the few present at the Niemen on the day the two


his regiment and was soon taken as orderly by a general commanding a

The dinner was nearly over, and the Emperor, munching a biscuit, rose
the silence, asked him how he liked Moscow. She asked the question and
general temper of the age produced Napoleon’s power. But Napoleon’s
devotion to the sovereign, Rostóv pictured to himself an enemy or a
the Russians were running away and that he himself was killed, but he
occurred to him. On the contrary, he became more and more elated. It
“There now! It’s true that all you women are crybabies,” remarked
among them the staff officer and Zherkóv, who had been twice sent to
and insignificance—particularly acute by contrast with the sphere of

patience, trying to divert his mother’s attention to another topic.
instructions his father had sent and taking the correspondence and his

chevalier of St. George, Shinshín told them the town news, of the
this event was accompanied by its justification in the necessity for a
pretending to sleep, the sounds his nose emitted during the reading that

other, unexecuted orders but because they coincided with the course of
saw nothing of what occupied everyone else. Not only did she fail to
wealth of Moscow and the strength of its plunderers was destroyed. But
began refuting his spiritual daughter’s arguments.
were reporting. By long years of military experience he knew, and with
hostess look toward the door, and now and then glance at one another,
used to show at catchplay, now and then turning his good-natured, pale,

came at the right time. Tout vient à point à celui qui sait attendre. *
Tíkhon went and told the prince.

God,” said Pierre, regretfully and with an effort, feeling it
Alpátych’s cart and that of the innkeeper’s wife, which were slowly
stinging reproaches he meant to address to Kutúzov for his deception. He
gentleman’s” agitation, said with a smile:
“Ah!” said Rostopchín, hurriedly turning away his eyes from the young


immediately diverted by an exclamation at the other side of the table.
“Captain, there is soup and a leg of mutton in the kitchen,” said he.
At that moment, with soft steps, the countess came in shyly, in her cap
it always seemed to him that the really heroic exploits were being

“Ah, how do you do, great warrior?” said Rostopchín as soon as the short
scanned her person, while Natásha was like a girl exposed for the first

Having listened to her mother’s objections, Hélène smiled blandly and
losing his temper. “I shall answer for it and not you, and you’d
defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
At that moment Anna Pávlovna came up and, looking severely at Pierre,
visiting all the places he meant to go to and where he had been invited,
horse; another was perched up behind an hussar with his arms round him;
French battalion rushes to the bridgehead, spikes the guns, and the
whether to abandon Moscow or defend it; whereas, with the Russian army
Whatever presentation of the activity of many men or of an individual
“Oooh! For Christ’s sake let me alone!” cried the wounded man, but

Kaysárov recited.... Kutúzov smilingly nodded his head to the rhythm of
“And who will inherit his wealth?” he added in a whisper.
come from their Ryazán and Moscow estates to remove their household
with Napoleon if, contrary to expectations, these negotiations were
like method of enlightenment. Our Order imitates the ancient societies
“Well, the Lord be thanked, Princess,” said Mary Bogdánovna, not
Pierre hurriedly turned away from her and again addressed Princess Mary,
smooth again.


Princess Mary stayed on the veranda. The day had cleared, it was hot and
“What is your conception of Freemasonry?”
She always addressed him with a radiantly confiding smile meant for him
was a misfortune but it turned out a blessing! If it had not been for
folly, and cruelty. He thought of his wife. “They are all alike!” he
Their conversation was very simple and unimportant. They spoke of the
obtained his leave. His hussar comrades—not only those of his own
it,” says history.
door, and added in a whisper so that her son should not hear, “Wish me
Then Louis XVIII, who till then had been the laughingstock both of the
indignation against the foreigners and an increase in patriotic zeal.
visit him in Moscow or at Bald Hills later on; and if not, the wedding,
expression he saw on other faces—an expression that spoke not of
thousand Austrians, with a hundred thousand Russians, were to operate in
many spiritual doubts and joys.
Natásha put one knee on the armchair, stooped over her mother, embraced
Sónya, shaking off some down which clung to her and tucking away the
“You value your own pride and don’t wish to apologize,” continued
wounded soldier was so dirty, coarse, and revolting that his proximity
“I’m not such a fool.... Just you try it on.... Allez-vous

but her pleasure did not cause her for a moment to forget her aim. And
day, but he did not come. On the second and third day it was the same.
take that force to be something quite different. They see it in what is
province, obliged our army to turn still more to the south and to cross
“Very,” said Pierre.
“You are friendly with Borís, aren’t you?” asked Véra.

seemed), but by the question how to tell the Emperor—without putting

which he held the hilt of his naked saber, looked just as it usually
he had ready in his mind, of all he knew and had seen. But the Emperor
Farther and farther he rode away, stopping at other regiments, till at


and so sparkling their eyes. Sometimes the best of the pupils, of whom

When it was late at night they went out together into the street. The
regularly and quietly. It was evidently not so much his sufferings that


In the summer of 1809 Pierre returned to Petersburg. Our Freemasons knew
daughter. She lowered her head and was ready to burst into tears.

and amused as he was when he put on the little icon. “Did he believe?

Are we despicable Germans?”
You’re wrong to think that of me... I... for me... for the honor of

man, be for her? In her thoughts of marriage Princess Mary dreamed of

house and back again, shouting confused instructions to the hurrying
aside, Dólokhov rode up the incline at a walk.
army desired to do so. But to make an attack the wish to do so is not
been treated in the same way, and so have others who on the plea of
count moved to go out of the room, taking the papers, probably to reread
were in animated talk over their tea about the events of the day and the
father.
glorious task for which he was chosen. I shall await your most gracious
reproached the commanders in chief for every step they retired. He could
Many historians say that the French did not win the battle of Borodinó

forming up. “One word from me, one movement of my hand, and that ancient
struck him by her beauty on the preceding day. Today, when he had caught
had happened; and he was only dissatisfied that her indisposition
At first she heard only Métivier’s voice, then her father’s, then
bridge, and they laughed at and slandered him, flinging themselves on,
Frenchmen as they ran past him, of the lowered and smoking gun, and of

ranks; Anatole was in the army somewhere in the provinces; Prince Andrew
with the river between himself and the main body of the French. On the
about him: “You have not only saved Russia, you have saved Europe!” they
Those who were able to get away were going of their own accord, those
When he awoke next morning the major-domo came to inform him that a
have used his Old Guards, who were intact, and the battle would have

From Prince Shcherbátov’s house the prisoners were led straight down the
and gave me to understand that that was my duty. But I replied that
Pierre went on with his diary, and this is what he wrote in it during

tears.”
He vouchsafe its revelation to us through His divine Spirit.
they had gone by, the same stream of soldiers followed, with the same
saying something witty and stinging.
to Rostóv, rode up to Napoleon in an orderly’s jacket and on a French
there would be least danger.
become three times as rich as before.
between ourselves, was very far gone in the land of tenderness...”
it.
I tell you he is in our hands, that’s certain! But what was most

ultimately vanquished, attack of terror before the unknown.
To the third party—in which the Emperor had most confidence—belonged the

quite mistaken if you reckon me or my mother among such people. We are
asked. “They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking, and though I
proud, or that certain writers wrote certain books.
surrounded by pages, aides-de-camp, and an escort, along the road to
to signify his approval of them all, and the group increased, dispersed,
and constraint was evident, as if they were ashamed of not having loved
the study, like pistol shots, came the frequent sound of the old man
Guards charged, followed the line of reserves, going far round the place
asked permission to be present at the battle out of curiosity. The
his will, then evidently a cold affecting the manifestation of his will
our fine speeches and in his rude and savage way throws himself on the
a court of justice. All were silent or talked in low tones. Prince

had passed and Pétya realized for a moment that this Tíkhon had killed a
incidents of the war,” says Thiers, narrating this episode. In
him. Pale, frightened people were doing something around the workman.
after himself and, in passing through to the drawing room, stopped a
ventured to draw the Emperor’s attention to the devotion of the Poles
cannon and the crowd were dragging it out. A cannon ball killed someone

certainly is communicated very surely, and flows rapidly, imperceptibly,
you have seen him.”
been thinking.
cometh!’”
“What are you staring at?” he shouted to the cook, who in her red skirt,
beardless old man who looked like a footman. That old man noticed a
    CHAPTER VI
someone there not of the conventional society stamp. And such was
so natural that even the Russian marauders moved in that direction, and
something touching and solemn out of this address to his comrades. He
you? I love you madly. Can I never...?” and, blocking her path, he
round-shouldered Captain Túshin, stumbling over the tail of the gun
Thanks to Denísov the conversation at table soon became general and
actual historic event such as the campaign of 1812 for instance, they
each side of the trench, the earth was cut out to a breadth of about two
one thing only—his future happiness. Sometimes it seemed to him that
was beginning to lose its sublimity, gave a sign with his hand. A single


He was proud of her intelligence and goodness, recognized his own
“Count Peter Kirílovich! How did you get here?” said a voice.
Bítski what the Emperor was pleased to say at the Council? Can all that
soldier.
great sacrifices of us... I am ready to submit myself in all things to
rehearsing, and began telling him how he had already been in a battle
estime que je professe pour the Orthodox Russian army, j’avoue que
the early days of their marriage, took her about with him wherever the
qualities of him who possesses it, it must evidently be looked for
the rest of his life.

with three) and the music ceased. A worried aide-de-camp ran up to the

that God heard her prayer.

onto the snow. She was sitting on some bundles a little behind the old

received as a savior.”

had not yet come home when Rostóv rode back early in the morning from

Natásha did not remember how that day passed nor that night, nor the
revoir! ”—and she left the hall.

Prince Andrew spoke so earnestly that Pierre could not help thinking
under any external impulse as people in the full vigor of life do,
the causes that produce it. But modern history has not done this. Having

“What are you disputing about?” said the major angrily. “What does it
the whole day on horseback inspecting the locality, considering plans
CHAPTER VIII

treated her husband in a friendly and conspiratorial style, as if,
was aiming.
impossible to wait for her recovery. Prince Andrew was expected in
her that things must be so, and yet it was dreadfully sad.
shoulders, and noisy stalls brilliant with uniforms, glittered before
three sides. The most vigorous attack came from an old acquaintance,
retreat after a battle have lost it is what we say; and according to

himself in his report, written in hot haste after the battle, speaks of
recalled Pétya’s words. And the Cossacks looked round in surprise at the
be overthrown by the angel whom it has pleased the Almighty, in His
usual formalities he left the lodge and went home.
surprised them all. Nicholas was himself rather surprised at the way he
feeling respect for our holy order and is too preoccupied and satisfied

and the difficult names of villages. Weyrother complied and Dohktúrov
we should probably have defended the Shevárdino Redoubt—our left
(nicknamed in society, “the King of Prussia”) ever since the Emperor
CHAPTER XXVI
went on of itself. The killed were dragged from the front, the wounded


Princess Mary, with her acute sensibility, understood all this at the
Eh?... What then?... Eh?”
“Well, all wight,” said Denísov.
“He is a nervous, bilious subject,” said Larrey, “and will not
Pfuel, remarking that Prince Andrew was just back from Turkey where the
reprimanding and reproaching him. Túshin gave no orders, and,

“I never invited them. They came to disturb my life—and there is not
he desired it the less he allowed himself to believe it. This question
    CHAPTER XIV
coin in his palm. “She will soon be singing and frolicking about. The
was a combined service of prayer on the occasion of the Emperor’s


been he was a most worthy man. You don’t meet such men nowadays.... And
“What companion, my dear boy? Eh? You’ve already been talking it over!
priceless man, but he’s sixty. Is he to go up for examination?”
each other, the men disperse, attack singly, run away when attacked by

“I do not understand,” said Pierre, feeling with dismay doubts
something and went away. It seemed to Pierre that even the prince was
The courier who had been sent on in advance to find out where the
just as Alpátych entered.
Kaysárov was about to draw back the curtain of the window facing

advantageous match but a splendid, noble fellow... he is my friend...”
“Adored friend of my soul!” he wrote. “Nothing but honor could keep
speech by an unexpected cramp in his throat. He paced up and down a


Karáy finished scratching his hindquarters and, cocking his ears, got
was before?” Natásha rejoined with conviction. “The soul is
such a plan in which the enemy’s position was assumed to be known,
anything, but to comply with his mother’s demands he even incurred some
melodramatically gentle expression and he held out his hand.
his impulsive nature, does get into mischief (a boy can’t help it), he
taken by the fight, and that course never can be known in advance and
squadron in which Nicholas Rostóv served as a cadet was quartered in
members and guests jostling one another and trying to get a good look
looted.


people by his strange comments. But at this time he saw everybody—both
“Finished, finished!” little Natásha’s gleeful yell rose above them all.
the cheeks, the same expression was on her charming childlike face with

“What trouble would it be to you?” he said. “I have not got one. Please
to his inn. The paper handed to him by the Governor said this:
Russians, but when he looked again with the naked eye, he could not tell
ignorance of what steps to take, and the enormous number of advisers and
the French, galloped along the front as hard as his horse could go, but
and Madame Kwüdener, and wead Ecka’tshausen and the bwethwen. Oh, they
turned angrily in his calèche and gazed sternly from side to side.

a sense of disgust the minutest details of this humiliating scene he

is that if your brother, Prince Andrew Nikoláevich, were not living, it
“No, it’s impossible to do anything here,” thought Rostóv,
song, arousing an involuntary sensation of courage and cheerfulness.
Nicholas did not hear his own cry nor feel that he was galloping, nor
arrangements would be made for the sick, and that in general everything
harder than before. The saturated road no longer absorbed the water,
“Well, what’s this now? What have you been up to now, I should like
“He is no more....”
“Well then, accept his offer. It’s high time for you to be
At the end of the letter she informed him that in a few days she would
all through the dinner, replied that just as “all roads lead to Rome,”
     * And all that follows therefrom.
“To Moscow, our ancient Capital!
Princess Mary looked at her companion without understanding what she was

simply enjoyed their pleasure and tried to fit in with it.
that all was well.”



Pierre took it and began reading.

busy with similar peaceful affairs—near the shelter of the regimental
destroy it. It is the very essence of the soul. Yet how many people have



the 18th Brumaire; was not that an imposture? It was a swindle, and not
He pressed her hand and released it, and she went back to the candle and
or other Moscow revelers’, drank whole nights through, outvying
captured several hundred prisoners in the course of a month; and there
which was not clear to him, to question his chief steward, to visit his


Since Prince Andrew had last seen him Kutúzov had grown still more
he is regretfully abandoning Moscow. Sire! Kutúzov’s action decides the
But dazed by the force of the movement, it was long before people
and the rattling of carriage wheels seemed to fill his ears, and now
“That’s what comes of a modern education,” exclaimed the visitor.
“Give them that corn if there is enough of it. Distribute it all. I

father and of Prince Andrew. Involuntarily she thought their thoughts

front.
    CHAPTER IX
“That’s just it,” interrupted Dolgorúkov quickly, laughing.
important post in Vienna. Both the foreign minister and our ambassador
fire glowed—the first of those that were beginning in Moscow. To the
of what was long past. Princess Mary spoke of her childhood, of her
staff could be heard conversing in French, and Kutúzov’s gray head in
It was nearly three o’clock but no one was yet asleep, when the


Dólokhov.

throat with the other. The officer, dropping his sword, seized Pierre by

hand them to the Emperor after my death. Now here is a Lombard bond
riding round the wolf, crying “ulyulyu!” shouting and preparing to

workmen surrounding the publican paused in indecision.

poor, dark-eyed niece of hers was so meek, so kind, so devotedly




urgently than anyone begging Louisa Ivánovna not to refuse.
Natásha looked at him, and by way of answer to his words her eyes
irony because he thought she was trying what she believed to be the last
The wattle wall the men had brought was set up in a semicircle by the

laughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomte
we have a man!” said he, glancing sternly and significantly round at
entrusted her to Belóva. Agraféna Ivánovna used to come to wake Natásha
personally. To this semicouncil had been invited the Swedish General
Kozlóvski scanned the ranks resolutely and included Rostóv in his
The fifth party consisted of those who were adherents of Barclay de
Another smith tried to enter the doorway, pressing against the publican
fist of his newly bled arm so violently that the table nearly broke down
And in order finally to touch the hearts of the Russians—and being like

expression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with
hearing what was said to him. Napoleon did not notice this expression;
With drooping head Princess Mary left the crowd and went back to the
Pierre.
that it was impossible to stop them, spurred his horse and rode to the
cover that it was Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis.
burden as quickly as possible, on the third day after his arrival he
to them. Down below, a man wearing something red was running through the
Dólokhov a few days before, and on the day that Sónya, after listening
But what is the matter with you, Mary?” he suddenly asked.

“Lads! here’s to our Sovereign, the Emperor, and victory over
surprise.
now aiming, now counting the charges, now giving orders about replacing
“Say what you like,” exclaimed Sónya, in a despairing voice as she
slaughter which could be of no avail either to the French or the
“What a strange antipathy,” thought Pierre, “yet I used to like
diplomatic difficulties and ends the military movement of that period of
Hélène, then she turned to Pierre with the same words of welcome
employed by lively chatty people, and consisting in the assumption
have been even less reason to expect a disturbance among the people
to meet that man whom I despise, so as to give him a chance to kill and


Pierre who had been regarded with patronizing condescension when he was
her scarcely defined bosom rising and falling regularly, and with
to weep. Now it happened that in the group was the very man who had
could find it out before others. In the figure in which he had to choose
the more I jest and the calmer I am the more tranquil and confident you
“But what is there in running across it like that?” said Ilágin’s
    CHAPTER XII

Thirdly, it would have been senseless to sacrifice one’s own troops in
Just as in a clock, the result of the complicated motion of innumerable
    CHAPTER XIII

Tarútino) to the place where the attacking columns were to meet. He sat
of us. Besides, I want to go very much and certainly will go, so don’t
injure you in the eyes of other young men who visit us, and above all
against which she had argued, but divested of everything superfluous
vainly wasted his efforts—which was a thing he never allowed to
Pierre sniffed as he looked at her, but did not speak. Till then he had
yesterday and I have come to do so today. I never experienced anything
kind, that is the chief thing,” thought Princess Mary; and fear, which
Emperor from Petersburg. Before the news of the abandonment of Moscow
being gloomy. For the same reason they are always hard at work and in a
firm faces surrounded his benefactor on all sides. But though they were
CHAPTER VII
historians attribute such conceptions to Napoleon and his marshals,
the hussars.”


pleased faces, for they knew that under no other management could they
peaceful, and glorious fatherland, I should have proclaimed
admitted that they did not know what upheld the earth, but knew there
“No, she has dressed and gone into the drawing room,” said Sónya.
they settled down in the sitting room, “does it ever happen to you to
mentioned. But Princess Mary experienced a painful rather than a joyful
“Whom shall I announce?”
the Note.

past Tatárinova, a lot of digging is going on there. Go up the hillock
And by some latent sequence of thought the descent of the Mozháysk hill,
involuntarily, so much so that the only thing left to do seemed to be
saddle, he galloped to the other flank of the squadron and shouted in
would be too extraordinary,” and at the very moment she thought this,
cutting off and capturing Napoleon with his marshals and his army.

Borís lodged with another adjutant, the Polish Count Zhilínski.

had undressed, but without washing off the cork mustaches, they sat a
“Só-o-onya! Look here! How can you torture me and yourself like that,

the crowd collected round him he seemed confused, but at the demand
hats. Princess Mary lowered her eyes and, tripping over her skirt, came
He must think that I, too, am afraid of him—and in fact I am afraid of
“Shall I call up our men from beyond the hill?” he called out.
gravity!”
at the ruins and did not recognize districts he had known well. Here and

“The news is reliable,” said Bolkhovítinov. “Prisoners, Cossacks, and
one is to interfere with his arrangements—leads his division to


“I quite understand,” answered Princess Mary, with a sad smile.
advanced noiselessly, only occasionally a jingling of the artillery
happened had Napoleon been in time to penetrate into the rich southern


abrupt stories of the past, or uttered yet more abrupt and scathing
the reproachful tone of a man who has repeated the same thing more
CHAPTER XXII


and groans mingled in a general hubbub, then the firing died down.
together, and made some steps on the very tips of her toes.
conversation from changing its ordinary character of gossip about the

Russian, “because I have a detestation for all the French, and the
his track. Anatole Kurágin promptly obtained an appointment from

as she who had herself suffered so much could render, and showed him
by the living mass of moving infantry, Váska Denísov, red and shaggy,
exceedingly lofty, the members of the household and the footmen—one

caused by the Emperor’s presence, he danced, and had chosen Natásha
not fit in under any rule and is directly opposed to a well-known rule

The movement of humanity, arising as it does from innumerable arbitrary

“Lie down!” cried the adjutant, throwing himself flat on the ground.
Bagratión appeared in the doorway of the anteroom without hat or sword,

the “heroes”) of the efficacy of the directions issued in wartime by
Then with the unerring official memory that characterized him he
was writing in haste from the field of battle before collecting full

something stronger and more important than his own will—the inevitable
had vanquished. The French dragoon officer was hopping with one foot on

of the sun. In front, far off on the farther shore of that sea of mist,
“Yes, it is all very horrid,” interrupted Pierre, “very horrid.”
Those eyes, filled with happy tears, gazed at him timidly,

of,” said the princess in the same petulantly playful tone in which
the sound of cries and blows were heard. On returning to lunch Nicholas


Rostóvs were staying in Yaroslávl, and in what condition Prince Andrew


CHAPTER XX
letter, but comforted him with hopes of reconciling their father to the

words what they understood.
the general confusion. The men of this party had both the quality
The historians consider that, next to the battle of Borodinó and the
on her bed, laughed at the pleasant thought that she would immediately
defended and others still discussed it, the question was no longer
confusing their minds by dwelling on mystical books that merely awaken
understand, but as people hurry to finish a necessary but unpleasant and
fresh and attractive. The music became more and more audible. The melody

There was something peculiar about it, quite unsoldierly, rather comic,
for everyone, for myself, and for everyone. And I was innocent—that
to the princess.
hurry. “How can I think of the bright side of life when, as you see, I
activity controls people’s actions, for that view is not confirmed by
by the softness and flexibility of her small limbs, and by a certain
came over his face. He said nothing to her but looked at her forehead
words he had found so difficult to utter: “I love you.” “It all
her mother and went out.
Through the door came the sounds of Kutúzov’s voice, excited and

cap, who had come sailing in from another room as soon as the guests
In regard to this question, history stands to the other sciences as
made no kind of deduction from or application of them. He replied to

could make only one movement at that single moment of time, it could not
front ranks carried it swaying to the very steps of the porch. The tall
the fields on which these men were floundering about. As soon as they
“My God, how happy I should be if he ordered me to leap into the fire
“I have been calling you all night...” he brought out.

cast down his eyes and hurried out as if it were none of his business,

The French alphabet, written out with the same numerical values as the
“There, by the wheel!”
    CHAPTER II
take her for her connections and wealth. Are there no women living
which Denísov, without alluding to the offenses of the commissariat
speaking to him about Lise as if she were alive—he had forgotten she

left bank of the Danube and took up a position for the first time
After Mass, when they had finished their coffee in the dining room



each individual which used to excite and irritate Pierre now became a
saddle. On all sides, the hussars were busy with the dragoons; one was
the German village of Salzeneck. The best quarters in the village were
so they took my Vánka to be shaved for a soldier! But we all have to
latter.
Pierre too when she had gone almost ran into the anteroom, restraining

their woolen stockings to the earthen floor and began putting on his
drove past was an acquaintance of the Rostóvs’, and Pétya thought of
had taken while passing through Moscow, he left the kvass to Morel and

“My dear,” said Princess Mary, addressing her brother from beside
and scarcely breathing, watched from her ambush with sparkling eyes.
now several quickly one after another. Again all was silent and then
one o’clock at night. Dismounting at a cottage on whose wattle fence


look. “A misfortune... about Peter Ilýnich... a letter,” she finished

irritation.
Tsar, who still remained in the same attitude of indecision.
neither moving forward to protect the battery nor backward with the

thrashing for letting a private traveler have the courier horses.

her sitting room, from which those who were there immediately withdrew
But she remembered too how he had changed of late toward Mademoiselle
try to display any of these—but because of something else. He despised
befallen his son.
at the head of them Rostóv recognized Napoleon. It could be no one
reproached her for yielding to a man without being married. Mademoiselle
Overtaking the battalions that continued to advance, he stopped
down by them.
laughter, the shouting of familiar voices, the growling of a bear, and
a horn, with the signal agreed on in case of a fight.
smiling, but in spite of herself her eyes under their thick long lashes
correct, others that it was not, and explained the false rumor that had
on both sides.
“Here at least we shall have the benefit of your company all to
“We shall see.”
mind at that time was: who was it that had really sentenced him to
things that had never occurred. Mademoiselle Bourienne also shared them
“How many inhabitants are there in Moscow? How many houses? Is it true

but the feeling is stronger than I. Yesterday I tormented myself and

“Well, you should get some sleep now,” said the Cossack.
Through the door came the regular hum of a lathe. The princess timidly

rattle on the bridge as if nuts were being spilt, and the hussar nearest
“She’ll be ours!” said Lavrúshka to Ilyín, winking.
town—was one it was more flattering to be received in than any other.
fetch the Frenchman, Moreau,” he said, alluding to the invitation made

“A good figure and in her first bloom,” he was saying, but on seeing
grand is bad. Grand is the characteristic, in their conception, of some
Pierre’s eyes with it and tied it in a knot behind, catching some
appreciate at a glance her superiority to the plain, badly dressed,
became disorganized, many were drowned and many surrendered, but those

The sun was only just appearing from behind the clouds, the air was
“Oh, come now! As if you could come at a wrong time!” said Borís,


light of the illuminations and to the sound of music talked to her for a
and Anna Mikháylovna (who found it necessary to accompany him) was
rich youths, officers and cadets, who had galloped past him on their
son.
him disputing hotly with his visitor. Pierre was maintaining that a time

The Emperor interrupted him.
by the clouds, over the roofs of the street opposite, on the
Bourienne after a pause. “I understand that you could not, and cannot,
thought again now. “Now he will never tell anyone what he had in his


they had a pretext ready to account for it.
to the fichu with a happy and kindly smile.
But at that moment Berg came to Pierre and began insisting that he
confession, communion was administered to the dying man, preparations

The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was an anecdote, then current,
forth clouds of smoke. It was no longer a battle: it was a continuous
such love as Sónya was speaking of. But Natásha had not yet felt
The goal is reached. After the final war of 1815 Alexander possesses all
living without having solved the problems that so absorbed him. He had

they must look somewhere, or it meant too much. Pierre hesitated,

from their positions, they could not have made this last effort, for all
For reasons known or unknown to us the French began to drown and kill
and his excitement. At the same moment Natásha, without drawing
would occasionally raise himself on an elbow and glance at Morel with a
the scraping of chairs. Then one of those conversations began which last
him. He carried his resolution within himself in terror and haste, like
of this common attraction to Smolénsk, their goal, drew each of them in
Stepánovich Adráksin. Adráksin was in uniform, and whether as a result
and threw them round the little girl who had run in.
when, seeing these girls, he realized the existence of other human
of the firing and shouting. But the firing and shouting did not relate
“Tell me, you did not know of the countess’ death when you decided to
and feeling at that moment. “Is there anything at all behind that
to have happened, to me. Stepán Stepánych also instructed me how I ought
who appeared at his call. “Hurry off and tell Maksím, the gardener,
from it. Through these forests Denísov and his party rode all day,
restless and hastened to rejoin her. Together they felt more in harmony
sway and scatters its last snows and storms with desperate fury. A relay
standing on the dam wiping himself with a towel, felt confused at seeing
by him, they offer him to you as they would a dish of choice sterlet.
every turn.
spent after he was wounded, the more deeply he penetrated into the new
singers.

CHAPTER XI
was before him and listened to what was said, though evidently seeing
and artillerymen’s bonfires. To the left, not far from the farthest
and returned a glove Pierre had dropped; the doctors became respectfully
where to haul it. They haul the log away, and it happens that this is
and obstinacy!”
Prince Andrew, his face distorted with fury, rode up to him and raised
people.
subscription. The lady who was thought to be most pleasing to the
Having released Mavrúshka, Natásha crossed the dancing hall and went
“Oh, hush, please!” said another.
“Devil take it!” said the voice of a man stumbling over something.
“He was a very clever man but has now grown quite feeble, as your honor
Petersburg I felt (I can say this to you) that the whole affair would go
“I won’t tell anyone!” and she ran off at once to Sónya.
Ilágin kept stealthily glancing at one another’s dogs, trying not
position. When anything particularly difficult or nasty had to be
Schön Grabern affair, just as those who have taken part in a battle
“But what am I to do?”
“It is a very suitable spot,” said the esaul.
Someone, a very important personage judging by the haste with which way
him, he quitted Moscow, approached Kutúzov without joining battle,
my word, they didn’t let us get near before they just threw down their
sobs of a woman, and the hoarse angry shouting of Ferapóntov. The cook

“What is it?” asked the person in the other room.
had suddenly turned into a low, solid vault that weighed him down, in
“Women’s fuss, women’s fuss!” said Alpátych.
into the vehicles.

my place,” she thought as she went out in the twilight toward the crowd
To console Pierre for these losses the head steward gave him an estimate
Napoleon’s wish, but one of them was slapped in the face by a French
said to himself, reflecting that he was not the only man unfortunate
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be
receives them.”
“I? I? What did I tell you?” said Pierre suddenly, rising and


the Mason’s arguments; he dreaded not to be able to believe in him.

“Sharpshooters of the 86th, forward!” shouted someone. The fifth
for everything, the colonel moved forward and ordered the second


shrieking were heard from different sides.
but he even dreaded to recall them and the bright and boundless horizons
which he is engaged, even with the air he breathes or the light that
unnecessary crockery should not be taken at all. When everything had

at the sentinel. “Je vous demande si le colonel est ici.” *
noncommissioned officer began talking with his comrades about regimental
passing among men and women who were entering and the program sellers,


story), and how Rostopchín let him go and assured the people that he was
material for science.
From the habit of fifty years all this had a physically agitating effect
low tones.
distinctly heard. “I thank you all for your hard and faithful service.

eat?... Perhaps...”
officers. Now what was the colonel to do? Have the officer tried and
things had to be. From the passage they went into a large, dimly
    CHAPTER XX
When Gabriel came to inform her that the men who had come had run
whiteness and softness Prince Andrew had only seen on the faces of
    Tendre mélancholie, ah, viens me consoler,
boots and shakos.
surrender of most of the Prussian fortresses had been received, when our
Pétya was carried out like a log and laid in the larger of the two
insurmountably difficult. At the same time that he refused the colonel’s

face of the man addressing him. Rostopchín grew confused and became
    De boire, de battre,
the reason of that sadness and suddenly began to cry.

acquaintances was a mixed and indefinite one. In Petersburg they were
another was not decided by Napoleon’s will but occurred independently of
of the sleigh.
and near Moscow.
the case with his bony fingers, tuned the guitar and settled himself in
This was the redoubt, as yet unnamed, which afterwards became known as
To understand, observe, and draw conclusions, man must first of all be
Pierre as “the man who does not give his name.” Glancing indolently and

either.”
and foul. Black robber bees are swiftly and stealthily prowling about

both....” He lifted his head and again the thick vein in his thin neck
And he looked at Pierre with a mocking, challenging expression. He

the first to gallop into the village street.
Meanwhile Prince Vasíli had opened the door into the princess’ room.
wished to help him but could not.
deceased that they had immediately let the matter drop.
power suppressed the ideas of the Revolution and the general temper of
and placed a bottle of claret in it. He also brought a bottle of kvass,
expressed the same wish—could no longer check the inevitable movement,
“God has nothing to do with it! Well, go on,” he continued,
prepared to continue, but just then Anna Pávlovna, who had kept a
procession: the Emperor was passing from the palace to the Cathedral of
place in his soul. Of late he had received so many new and very serious
Pétya.
“Yes, she is right,” thought the old princess, all her convictions

the Sunday before, “and always the same life that is no life, and the
should already have suggested to your heart, if it is sincere, more than

hand at the salute and resuming the game of adjutant and general for
seizing his father’s hand, he pressed it to his lips and burst into
this party belonged the foreign nobles, Wolzogen, Wintzingerode, and

already founded; all that remained was to organize it.
The little kitten, feasting her eyes on him, seemed ready at any moment

a dog!... There, it has beaten them all, the thousand-ruble as well as


back seized him by the arm, pulled him through the wicket, and ran back


from those who blame him and who profess to know the ultimate aim of the
feeble voice, so high pitched and irresolute. His face grew more and

At the entrance to Princess Mary’s house Pierre felt doubtful whether

and outlined everything. The smoke of the guns mingled with this mist,
to the club again, drank a great deal, and came once more in touch
But he scowled at her angrily though also with suffering in his eyes,
impatiently.
“Yes, I saw him,” she said.

waved his feet about very rapidly. (He was Duport, who received sixty
“Hurrah!” and resolved that tomorrow, come what might, he would join the
“How d’you do, friend? Well, here he is!”
“Borís, come here,” said she with a sly and significant look. “I
“So you are still at that silly business!” quickly closed his eye

neglect him in favor of my own: we all have children and relations while
The bloodstained smith went beside them. The factory hands and others
“Wait a little, gentlemen,” said he. “The battle is won, and there is
this enemy of decisive action, gave battle at Borodinó, investing the

under you,” he repeated, knowing that his skill in beekeeping, his
Napoleon’s experience and so-called military genius, every effort was
often laughed at him, now said, with a common feeling of self-reproach
place by the dam of a small pond. It was past one o’clock. The sun,
loftiness of soul. She has refused to evacuate Malta. She wanted to
can tell whether I saw anything or not?” flashed through Sónya’s

him, or else how could that have happened which had happened? And how
The whole purport of his remarks now was evidently to exalt himself and
The booming cannonade and the fusillade of musketry were growing more
and will then inherit everything under the will? And if the will and
The little princess talked incessantly, her short, downy upper lip
shall we meet again? I am going abroad. We have had a good time—now



“I cannot inform Your Majesty at what o’clock the battle began at
“Ah, Sónya, if you only knew how happy I am!” cried Natásha.
Before long Borís, Berg’s old comrade, arrived. There was a shade of
Nicholas went to her, kissed her hand, and sitting down silently at her
threes, and reckoning them off on his fingers. Mentally addressing the
there, it’s awful! Two bands and three sets of singers!”
must not give way. He sprang forward and upset an old woman who was
business!”
exposed, and without fuel or forage, so something must be done, and, as
then there are you and the children and our affairs. Is it for my own
the village of Stromílova to Dmítrovsk.
if the matter concerned some brief conflict in which only a small number
And a joyful yet pathetic expression which seemed to beg forgiveness for
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU
“To combat the evil which sways the world...” Pierre repeated, and a
life, his absent-mindedness and simplicity—here among these people gave

so I hold my peace. An ax will be useful, a hunting spear not bad, but a

and would always love and honor him—yet he set off to join his army,
Pierre finished what he had begun. It was the sequel to his complacent


the French grenadier.

“Why? No, tell me!” Natásha began resolutely and suddenly stopped.
rivulet flowed, the soul-stirring rolling and crackling of musketry was
in the same order in which they had entered but with redder faces, the
man.... Here he is, and the count has not once asked for him.”
concealed from them but comprehensible to us. Such is the inevitable
Though Balashëv was used to imperial pomp, he was amazed at the luxury
criterion of life.
clouded with smoke, through which, high up, the sickle of the new moon

Club is closed and the police are leaving.”
he is excitable and easily forgets himself and other people. A Russian
that end and when did this new, terrible state of things begin? What
with him to the troyka.
“You, you... will see,” was all Natásha could say.
A few minutes later the Governor received Alpátych and hurriedly said to
was engaged in conversation with a general and did not answer her
field setting the borzois on the hare. The tranquil Ilágin, Nicholas,
heroism!”

“Won’t you come over to the other table?” suggested Anna
on the basis of an abstract notion—science, that is, the supposed
to him. He declared that he did not wish to remember her existence and
ruins of Moscow. All that he now witnessed scarcely made an impression


the Deity but from a man, which is, that the man who gives the command


Rostóv with Dólokhov and Denísov stayed on at the club till late,
CHAPTER XIV

showed her.
but most of the gentry were strolling about the room.

“Why did they write, why did Lise tell me about it? It can never
of England, inspired by such hatred of our nation! This victory will
force, so variously understood by the historians themselves, is really
Within half an hour adjutants had been sent in various directions with
something like qualms of conscience. She had reminded him of what was


suddenly began to cry.
Pierre stopped, being pressed against the side of the cutting in which
smile of kindliness puckered the soldier’s lips as he put these
whole dining hall, and last of all the children, tutors, and governesses
behavior to women Anatole had a manner which particularly inspires in
were in them. She leaned over to her brother and kissed him, slightly
enormous table would say: “Well, Dmítri, you’ll see that things are
“I ask one thing of you,” he said sternly, “to obey me and not shove

Tíkhon called and, having praised him for his activity, said a few words
warrior doing some kind of man’s work of his own, without help or

second of September.
Natásha. Why this secrecy?”
talking to the corporal immediately asked what the Frenchman had said.
I am overwhelmed with business and it is purely out of charity that
Pierre got out and talked to the doctor, explaining his intention of
“Dispositions for an attack on the enemy position behind Kobelnitz and
aside.
the sight of the grandeur and glory with which he has covered France.
personal spite against each of the prisoners, in unexpected contrast to
common fatherland. I should have demanded the freedom of all navigable
he did not quite understand him. Moreover, Speránski, either because he
in the world and above everything in the world. “What were losses, and
that Moscow would be abandoned, and did not prepare for it. The

view prevailed expressed by Bilíbin—who now in Petersburg was quite at
dispositions...”

mention, and which you think is the result of your own mental efforts,
The French evacuation began on the night between the sixth and seventh
had not yet gathered courage to enter the circle.
him?” he asked.
who asked as long as he had anything to give. Formerly he had been in a
advance. The Emperor intended to join the army personally in a few days’
chief steward wrote every year telling him of fires and bad harvests,
that feeling of agitation and expectation in Pierre which he had been
Baron Funke to be appointed first secretary at Vienna? The baron by all
his participation in that action.
remained in the room and persistently talked about Moscow amusements and
actions of the mass but is itself continually controlled. It may seem

to have been complete, and some even spoke of Napoleon’s having been

makes things trying for you, doesn’t it?” Prince Andrew asked

masses of soldiers, or green ammunition chests and ordnance. And all
This red-haired man was neither a sergeant nor a corporal, but being

zero, we should even then not have arrived at the conception of complete

memory of the easy victory at Tarútino, urged Kutúzov to carry out
“Going?” And he went on writing.
was ready to accept it; but some secret feeling of repulsion for her,
also in French:
fixed straight on his son’s. Something twitched in the lower part of
his timidity. She felt that he wanted to say something to her but could
He could hear shooting ahead of him. Cossacks, hussars, and ragged

publican some skins from the factory and for this had had drink served

by six horses at a smart trot. Behind the calèche galloped the suite
and could even sit up on the beds if one drew close to the table.
does she bother me?” And she added, turning to Véra, “You’ll

shouts, ‘We are lost!’ or who shouts, ‘Hurrah!’ And only in the ranks
observations as to what had been burned down and what this or that part
jabbering! Fine, isn’t it? It’s all the Frenchy can do to keep up
and coldly cruel expression that had struck Pierre that morning on the
on this), while she was very young. Thirdly, he had a son whom it would
Smolénsk had looted provisions instead of storing them—how could that
delegate, the very men the serfs would themselves have chosen had they
own.
“Sónya, one can’t doubt him! One can’t, one can’t! Don’t you
copied or distributed:
said the princess, ignoring his question. “Now I know! Yes; if I have
about him; or, “No, don’t, we’d better wait!” He listened to the reports
considered it his duty as a doctor to pose as a man whose every moment
have tried to put them somewhere under cover,” Nicholas continued
“Then when am I to have it?”

courage, but she looked straight into his handsome face as it came near
The clear blue eyes looked at the commander in chief just as boldly as
at once but only looked up with a smile that said reproachfully: “How

“Natálya Ilyníchna,” Pierre began, dropping his eyes with a feeling of
“No, my dear boy” (the count, too, felt embarrassed. He knew he had
The nurse lit the gilt candles before the icons and sat down by the door
“One!” came the command.
a small reception, and just see how badly I am dressed.” And she
little princess, and having asked for a needle began tracing the Condé
Historians of the third class assume that the will of the people

Nicholas straight in the eyes, “you know the saying, ‘Lucky in love,
fortunately for her, she felt her eyes growing misty, she saw nothing

firm began to pull on his jacket without looking about him, but suddenly

and quite contrary to his usual character and said disagreeable things


Kaysárov, his adjutant’s brother.
(delivered by the French alone) was still to be heard from numerous
little princess walked twice round her, now adjusting a fold of the
former agility and boldness, and under the influence of the fright
it he begged Pierre to continue.
trusts to luck, one should make certain,’ and I want to try.”
dancers, who—having decided once for all that being disguised, no one
that has in its onslaught received a mortal wound, felt that they were

nice too! I need nobody.”
night I looked at the campfires and there was no end of them. A regular
When all was ready, the sabers stuck in the snow to mark the barriers,

“Oh, Denísov is quite different,” replied Nicholas, implying that


Thine almighty hand, and give him victory over his enemy, even as Thou
Métivier, who came in the morning with his felicitations, considered
on which he lay. I made the sign of the Knights of the East and of
there.
who lay motionless some distance from him with his head thrown back, was
first seized Nicholas and the others that she might not do the right
church, walking about the room singing. She had her back to him when he
soldier and the gay and smartly marching men. In the second file
The doctor, who was fetched that same night, bled him and said that the
    CHAPTER X
said, holding the casement and not closing it. “With lanterns. Most
“Where is it, that lofty sky that I did not know till now, but saw
upset when I told him people had come to ask what was the matter with
    CHAPTER XVIII
the French.
shall never know the whole chain since it is endless, and so again we
a fight led Murat to try to deceive Kutúzov in a similar way. Meeting

“Natásha, you are sixteen. At your age I was married. You say Borís
purpose she arranged a meeting between the young people at the bishop’s
was seized by an unreasoning springtime feeling of joy and renewal. All
“Oh, the coxcombs!” he muttered reproachfully.

They all separated, but, except Anatole who fell asleep as soon as he
“Let that woman alone!” exclaimed Pierre hoarsely in a furious voice,
“Then you don’t consider the Emperor Alexander the aggressor?” he asked
existence he learned every day, he felt that now, in 1809, here in
water is running on my seat! I’ll go and look for shelter. The rain
drunken imbecile to account. The Frenchman listened in silence with the

When he opened the ballroom door Pierre saw Natásha sitting at the
unusual than what he was seeing. A skull, a coffin, the Gospel—it
people has by tacit agreement prescribed to them. But what this program


and my wife’s friends.” (He smiled still more pleasantly.) “I
out. The flames now died down and were lost in the black smoke, now
battle would have taken place where we expected it. In that case
    * Frühstück: breakfast.
Cossack scouts were moving. Suddenly on the road at the top of the high
And Nicholas again kissed her hand.
to take such a step without father’s or mother’s consent! And now she’s
His huge figure, with arms hanging down and with a puckered, though
principal guests. He was just going to take it when Dólokhov, leaning
again, as soon as all turned toward him, excused himself and said no


yet with unhesitating assurance that he was doing the right thing,
perceptibly. He was silent, and she did not know what to say. She now
Although that patience did come out, Pierre did not join the army,
back to the gate on seeing the carriage driving up. Two women ran out
Denísov’s dugout with a grave and serious face and regretfully showed
to sit down and make themselves at home, and then went out of the room.
On the third day of Christmas week, after the midday dinner, all the
“Oh, don’t speak to me of Austria. Perhaps I don’t understand
it left. Yes, I told you—the whole quarter beyond the river, and so it
replaced by a feeling of horror at what lay there before her. “No, he
“But, my dear princess,” answered Anna Mikháylovna blandly but
he unwrapped and offered Pierre some baked potatoes. “We had soup for
we find that a command can never be the cause of the event, but that a

mistakes in speaking French. With her he behaved with special care and

him. He tried to say something, but his face suddenly puckered and
him too, just opposite Gúryev’s house... Old Gúryev.... Oh, but
conception of “greatness.” “Greatness,” it seems, excludes the standards
Hearing not so much the words as the angry tone of Rostopchín’s voice,
feeling of life being possible only in each other’s presence.

“One moment, one moment!” replied the adjutant, and riding up to a stout
shouted at the militiamen who stood hesitating before the man whose leg
the Emperor. He felt that this nearness by itself made up to him for the

sparkling black eyes, and black tousled mustache and hair. He wore an
accompanied by a Cossack with spare horses.
Natásha.
powder,” said Prince Andrew banteringly yet tenderly.
frontier.
They were bivouacking. Denísov and Rostóv were living in an earth hut,
yourself in it. And now, when one wants to smooth the thing over, some
is the Krémlin, yes—I will give them just laws; I will teach them the
will be. I am in attendance on him, you know; I’ll mention it to him.
today. He has been here on leave and is taking Nicholas back with him.
occasions, and of his orders during the battle not being as good as

were bringing in silver and china, moving tables, and unfolding damask
Austria or Prussia, for we have to draw our information from French
guests. Natásha, who sat opposite, was looking at Borís as girls of
suite. “But, gentlemen...”
    CHAPTER VI
impression. Whether Dolgorúkov and Weyrother, or Kutúzov, Langeron,
and more attractive.
did Pierre cease to feel how sordid and humiliating were all mundane
whom hitherto he, like everyone else, had always called Buonaparte.
intriguing; in the body of the army they did not ask themselves where
her bare arms and neck—suddenly affected her both agreeably and

losing more than five thousand killed and wounded after Tarútino and
on Pierre the usual animating effects of a conflagration. It had a
the French were still regarded with mingled feelings of anger, contempt,

“Is my carriage ready?” asked Rostopchín, stepping back from the window.
On the day the count left, Sónya and Natásha were invited to a big
Davout did not know that he was adjutant general to the Emperor
“Adieu, ma bonne,” answered Prince Vasíli turning away from her.
“No, you have not understood me, don’t let us talk about it,” she
expression on his face pleased Natásha.
and who did not know Russian, yet felt deeply moved (as he wrote) when
ought to have occupied her thoughts now. She was roused from her reverie
heartrending scene.... It was a convoy of conscripts enrolled from our
     * (2) That it is great.
Andrew involuntarily agreed with him about everything. If he replied and

as in a spoiled child, a continual consciousness of her charming defect,
deployed squadron, rode at full trot downhill toward the dragoons.
or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
reopened in the warm climate, which obliged him to defer his return till
sat down again in her former position. Twice she turned and looked at
the regiment, and how satisfied his father was with him. Berg evidently
    CHAPTER XXIX
up feet and all in the corner of the sofa, tearing and twisting
stayed in Moscow?”
bringing him a letter from Kutúzov. This letter requested the count to
we’ll rest. The Tsar won’t forget your service. It is hard for you, but
and awkwardly over the parquet floor of the reception room, not knowing
on the other side, the children, tutors, and governesses. From behind
rays!” and she smiled amiably at Pierre. “We were just talking of you,”
wounded, but though his face was bleeding, he would not give up his
Princess Mary turned to Sónya and, trying to stifle the hostile
on me the duty of Rhetor. I feel myself weak and unworthy. Then our
On the first arrival of the news of the battle of Austerlitz, Moscow had
“I have only my cap to pin on.”
zealous champion of old of our country’s weal, is offered to Your
and kissed her.

entered his father’s dressing room (not with the contemptuous look and


fur cloak, and, beside Sónya and in front of her mother, mounted the
in the soldiers’ ward, and still seeming to see fixed on him those
The vice-King will occupy the village and cross by its three bridges,

young, with a dimple in the chin and light-blue eyes—was not an enemy’s
it might really have been so? Could one possibly make out amid all that
not billeted on the inhabitants as is usual in towns but lived in it as
centered round a single incident: Kutáysov’s death. Everybody knew
in all his activity he was never once untrue to it?
Highness bread and salt. “Her husband has welcomed his Serene Highness

felt, through her happiness, that there is another sort of happiness
cold expression.
postilions, and scullions stood at the gate, staring at the wounded.
“Come, Anna Makárovna,” Pierre’s voice was heard saying, “come here into
giving the messenger a significant look.
    CHAPTER V
“Oh no!” Pierre replied, looking at Prince Andrew with frightened,
turned to leave the room, but Pierre held her hand.
containing information about the orders to the French army had been
pointed to the peasants—“asks you to come up to the house.... Won’t
Rostóv for his friendship to her Fédya, often talked to him about her
contradictory, except the feeling that guides the dream, so in this
had long since promised to hand over to him some papers of her deceased
snub-nosed face with its high cheekbones, and baring his white teeth,





“Natásha, I have asked you not to speak of that. Let us talk about you.”
then that same face pale, quivering, and suffering, as it had been when
broad in the hips, and with prominent shoulder blades. His face was
involuntarily waded knee-deep in the bog.
embraced him and lifting his spectacles kissed his friend on the cheek
I’ll teach you to think!” and lifting his stick he swung it and

on the field.

Fourthly and chiefly it was impossible, because never since the world
We know that man has the faculty of becoming completely absorbed in
horror, as by a presentiment.
mind easy,” said he in abrupt sentences while sealing his letter.
not answer. The hussar at that moment noticed the face of the red-nosed
In Petersburg she had enjoyed the special protection of a grandee who
Smolénsk. Fortune is frankly a courtesan, Rapp. I have always said so


were kept, and took out what had once been one of the most important,
“I think, Princess, it is not convenient to speak of that now,”
soldiers of the escort had raised their muskets, fired, and run
regiment had been broken up. All he knew was that at the commencement
the enormously high study door opened and showed the figure of a rather
NAPOLEON
postilion started the horses, the off pole horse tugged at his collar,
had entered. The most solemn mystery in the world continued its course.
herself suggested that he should go to Petersburg, though she would feel
him for the love of heaven to drive carefully down the hill. He knew
to join some Swedish forces at Stralsund; how two hundred and twenty
The nearest soldiers shrank back, the gun driver stopped his horse, but
Petersburg people. He was interrupted several times by applause. When
saying that, on the contrary, she remembered him quite well. Then
carried away by passion. Oh, only my poor mother...”
say: “What can one do with our Russian peasants?” and imagined that he
know yourself that last winter the count made a will by which he left



unoccupied and to place troops below it. Some of the generals expressed
Princess Mary took Pierre into the drawing room.
he can’t help plowing and mowing; if he didn’t, he would go to the
“How can you judge what’s best?” he cried, the blood suddenly

All the unmarried ladies and even the married ones except the very
repeated. “I should be glad enough to fall asleep, so it’s not my
find out at what distance there were other French troops. They reckoned

given out, everybody was escaping—going away somewhere, and in general
word in it to the best of his ability.)
of three rubles a week made to officers); with his strength, which he
of generation, he sees hundreds of dull, listless, and sleepy shells of

dancers do, Natásha, rising energetically from her heels to her toes,
he. “We want to give the Senate new juridical powers, but we have no

this indecision appeared to him majestic and enchanting, like everything
orders or for acting on their own initiative, for in battle what is at
that nothing had happened and asked him not to worry. Márya Dmítrievna
of the window, he saw it was an unsurpassable morning for hunting: it


“And who is this?” she asked her governess, peering into the face of
the balance of power in Europe, the diffusion of the ideas of the
“But after all who asked them here? Serves them right, the bloody
have brought away.... The icons, and my dowry bed, all the rest is lost.
his shrill, harsh voice. “The road is not swept for the princess my

campfires to the other side of the road where he had been told the
He came to the point at once, treating her ceremoniously.
speaking rapidly just as the prince did, and he climbed into the trap.


papers have to be signed.”
shawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a long time, as
Weyrother at Austerlitz, galloped assiduously from place to place,


crowd of soldiers. “It can’t be an attack, for they are not moving;
obvious, and yet Napoleon offered and Kutúzov accepted that battle.
looks for a head. But we are always judging, ‘that’s not well—that’s
Genoa and Lucca laying their petitions before Monsieur Buonaparte, and

“Ah! my dear, I am afraid you and your monk are wasting your
it was sealed up so it has remained, but Sophia Danílovna gave orders
Russian expedition actually cost France less than fifty thousand men;
stooping low, entered the battery to carry away the wounded man.
too are the forces.
simply dressed hair (two immense plaits twice round her lovely head like
“Dólokhov, Mary Ivánovna’s son,” she said in a mysterious
The infantry regiments that had been caught unawares in the outskirts
one another. And corresponding to the event its justification appears in
husband. Prince Andrew’s eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy did he
her joy left the child too soon, and she glanced round. The nurse with

With happy, exhausted faces, they laid the old wolf, alive, on a shying
life—that is to say, for history—whatever had to be performed.
ratify it; but it is only a trick. March on, destroy the Russian
throw up everything and fly to you, to press you forever to my ardent
“On the box. You’ll sit on the box, won’t you, Pétya?” cried Natásha.
she thought very plain, affected, and dry. Natásha suddenly shrank
“What a fine fellow you are, friend!” said the Cossack to a convoy

transports, and the guerrilla war were all departures from the rules.


looking at Pierre. “At the present time it is difficult to know the
Prince Andrew was lying raised high on three pillows. His pale face was
patted his favorite, Rostóv, on the shoulder.
moonlight.
regiments with their arms piled and the soldiers, only partly dressed,
Prince Vasíli did not reply, though, with the quickness of memory and
“What? His Serene Highness? I expect he’ll be here soon. What do you
returning his smile.
recur to her mind and were as if belonging to a remote past.
gone, Pierre did not go to bed or order horses but paced up and down
Taking the colonel’s outburst as a challenge to his courage, the
continued, following an unconscious sequence of ideas.
recaptured by other French troops, and Davout was alive and only
uniform as to a review, expecting to crush the French gallantly; but
from my heart as to an old acquaintance.”
“He’s coming!” shouted the signaler at that moment.
it had to happen, as there is between those who declared that the
into the drawing room. They can have all our half of the house.”

the first of you who moves forward.” Little Nicholas turned to look

“Well, you must excuse me, because... because... I shall go, and that’s
to fight, in order to get food and rest as conquerors in Moscow. So it
gone. Having got warm in his corner, he fell asleep and did not leave
order without clinging to anything to wander in hempen rags from place


her country house on the Stone Island, the charming Monsieur de Jobert,
become rosier, had curly dark hair, and, when merry and laughing, quite
“I’m sorry, sorry for that fine fellow. Give me the letter.”
Gobelin tapestries and Persian carpets in the house. When Natásha set

door into the huntsmen’s room, from which came the clear sounds of a
Napoleon sat at the foot of the knoll, drinking punch, when Murat’s
showed that, in spite of all his love and respect for his father, he was
Ryazán, Vladímir, and Shúya was very long and, as post horses were not
troops advanced on Borodinó from their left.
it was just this peculiarity of Speránski’s mind that particularly
rights, the relations of husband and wife and their freedom and rights,


or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with
here that men are needed. Advisers are always plentiful, but men are
    * “In a minute I shall be at your disposal.”
collective action which cannot find its justification in political
wounded men had stopped in the street.

of her beauty and fearful because of it. Her face struck Pierre and,
Chernýshev and Prince Andrew went out into the porch, where the Emperor,

oats from their movable troughs and sparrows flew down and pecked the
officers was the safest, and though he would have been glad to be of
with a staff, a wallet on her back, along the dusty road, directing her
barrier except the barrier of his own will.
... and the wish, which constitutes the Emperor’s sole and absolute
“No, he thinks only of himself,” muttered the princess without
common soldier prisoners were stationed. He wanted to talk to them. On
Bagratión gave no further orders and silently continued to walk on in
when his aid is required and a quiet onlooker when not called on to
“Oh, you fine fellows, my kind, kind friends! These are men! Oh, my
stables before dinner. Having taken precautions against the general
thick-set general with grizzled eyebrows and whiskers, and wider from

he was being crushed, together with that of rapture, still further
And she smiled her ecstatic smile.

lips, had shed gentle, happy tears, love for a particular woman again
He sighed, and glanced with a radiant, childlike, tender look at
and they awoke in him astonishment at the genius of his hero, a feeling
them, and feeling all the strength of her love for them. When they
the earth wall with his back turned as if he were examining something

five times. He entered the room softly. The little princess, plump and

to dinner. I suppose he won’t go?” she continued, turning to the
took), nothing more stupid or disastrous can be imagined than what he
courtiers accompanying the army were living in the best houses of the
unbearable! I don’t want... to be tormented? What am I to do?...”
suffer for it.”
me.”
intended to remain at Podólsk and had no thought of the Tarútino



As he looked at the matter in this way, he learned that he was being
believe that she could live when her beloved boy was killed in the bloom
consists in these historians do not say, or if they do they continually

Two valets rapidly dressed His Majesty, and wearing the blue uniform of
Again on all the bright faces of the squadron the serious expression
“Quand un officier fait sa ronde, les sentinelles ne demandent pas le
to cause you annoyance if only you will allow me to act as your escort.”
and her words at her first gracious reception of him, and then that same
“Well now, gentlemen,” said Bilíbin, “Bolkónski is my guest in
small cloud rose from the hill and was borne in a streak to the left by

singer” (he meant Natásha’s Italian singing master), “that’s
“Natásha?” she murmured.
Madeira”... “Hungarian”... or “Rhine wine” as the case might
Just as Pierre reached the door, the corporal who had offered him a

imagine...”
bewitchingly tender that he had not seen in her before. “Natásha,
farms at which Nicholas might procure horses, recommended to him a horse
He involuntarily remembered how Dólokhov, who had fully recovered his
manly thing to do. When the carriages had all passed in, the crowd,

Formerly, after he had given two or three orders and uttered a

work nearer to her.
getting on in years, uselessly and joylessly passing the best years of
quarters were, he believed, not far off.
Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed
him, or what was said of him; he was only glad that people were standing
those of higher ranks in the Order. 3. Morality. 4. Love of mankind. 5.

to look under the uniforms he would have found on every man a clean
thought, as he listened to voices in Kutúzov’s courtyard. The voices
the crowd of generals and officers surrounding him. Suddenly his face
the best post he could—preferably that of adjutant to some important
That day Nicholas Rostóv received a letter from Borís, telling him

“Why don’t you speak?” she inquired of a very old man who stood just
advice and help! He is a most absent-minded and absurd fellow, but he

That is what you have gained by alienating me!” And he walked silently



his elocution, was to read it. (He used to read at the Empress’.) The

engagement to Bolkónski, and that the wedding would be in a year’s
easy. And tell me, please—I’ve been meaning to ask—how is he
“Yes, sire,” and the aide-de-camp disappeared through the door of the
“I bestow it with pleasure,” said Napoleon. “And who is that young

and some lint each month or we should be lost!” he laughed. “Four
difficult for artillery and cavalry to retire. Prince Andrew took
Denísov, now a general on the retired list and much dissatisfied with
near by the news spread that the Emperor was unwell. He ate nothing and
shudder of disgust.
went on severely, as though there were something wrong about it which

enter the drawing room? Even if I like him I can’t now be myself with
clear.
showing the creases where it had been folded and thick gold epaulettes
“What? A minister? What minister? Who gave orders?” he said in
His face expressed entreaty, agitation, and ecstasy. Countess Mary

who ran downstairs and looked over from the halfway landing.
asked permission to advance.

The worse everything became, especially his own affairs, the better
“It is he, it is he, Nicholas!” said Countess Mary, re-entering the room
true that we are not conscious of our dependence, but by admitting our
conferring together anxiously and privately and heard suggestions of
much of it left.”
however they might change the setting and adornment of that face, it

brought by Lauriston, saying that there could be no question of peace.
“The count is suffering physically and mentally, and apparently you
exhausted faces of the spectators.
showing sympathy with them. Yet Pierre’s cunning consisted simply in
his hands to the blaze, and turned away his face.

countess and Natásha, and about albums and fancywork with Sónya.
Their sabers catching in the bridles and their spurs jingling, the
everything, annihilating him.
court privilege.”

“What is the matter with you, my dear?” she said crossly to the maid
looking for someone.
Madame de Staël, and others spoke certain words to one another only
since Karatáev had begun to grow weaker it had cost him an effort to
cause is the cause of my action.
And yet the former history continues to be studied side by side with the
aside, drawing her hand downward. “I have heard of certain projects
of the chiffonier and dressing table Berg involuntarily changed his tone
though without knowing its cause—was such as to remind one still more
“Prince Vasíli’s son, he, and a certain Dólokhov have, it is said,
connections... Well, then, you just...”
and felt their feelings. What they would have said and what they would
“Is that you, Clément?” he asked. “Where the devil...?” But, noticing
entered Moscow, finding it plundered, plundered it in their turn. They
only a withdrawal beyond the Niemen was now demanded. Napoleon turned
   And dare not Herculean Russians trouble...
he would be blamed for not having executed sooner the important order
won’t surrender, I say... Am I not right, sir?”
that the sovereign himself should not be with the army.”
“Natalie!” said Márya Dmítrievna. “I wish for your good. Lie still,

Again Princess Mary tried to catch someone’s eye, but not a single eye
descended the porch steps.
received him graciously, and promised to inform the Emperor. A few
over, and come back in an hour and tell me in his presence: yes or no.
     How sweet, as fancies wander free,
of the wood ran out of it, the different companies getting mixed, and
By the wall of China-Town a smaller group of people were gathered round
have proceeded. When Newton enunciated the law of gravity he did not say
Where’s the victory?”
“I never could understand how Nataly made up her mind to marry that
He threw the bottle to the Englishman, who caught it neatly. Dólokhov
thought.
nothing but harmed nobody and was a first-rate, good-natured fellow. But
Prince Andrew, who had also been brought forward before the Emperor’s
remains of sheds, chairs, tables, wheels, tubs, and everything that they
him to me!”
answer than the one Prince Andrew gave to this naïve question.
distinctly, but as often happens had not understood a word of what they

In neither case—however we may change our point of view, however plain

finished dressing and with her old nurse’s big shawl wrapped round
receive that science it is necessary to purify and renew one’s inner
Since the ball he had felt the approach of a fit of nervous depression
bed. “Ugh, how hard it is! Oh, that this toil might end and you would
asked Kutúzov, interrupting him.

“Ah, Princess Mary!” he said suddenly in an unnatural voice,
whole.’ So he begged: ‘Take me to her, take me to her.’ It’s the

“It would be good,” thought Prince Andrew, glancing at the icon his
when, if you remember, he posed as a sort of Marat at one of my soirees.
renewed, but Princess Mary saw by his face that he knew and thought of
nonsense!” he repeated, but still he patted Pierre affectionately
bright, sparkling blue eyes into his antagonist’s face. His mouth wore
Rostóv, without waiting to hear him out, touched his horse, galloped to

found ourselves in my bedroom where there is a double bed. He lay down


like!” And flourishing his arm energetically he turned sideways to the
the part played by free will in the general affairs of humanity. A
grief for Mamma... business difficulties... muddles, terrible muddles!

Rostóv could already see their faces and heard the command:
He asked, “Whose company?” but he really meant, “Are you

nearer and saw that the old man had only one leg bent under him, the
CHAPTER XII
was spitting blood. A bullet had evidently hit him in the throat or
began reciting some French verses describing her guilty love for her

and let us talk sensibly while there is still time, be it a day or be it
and the orders he gave them and, to his surprise, found that no orders
Natásha—are you glad?”
which produces events. They do not recognize it as a power inherent in
intimate, came to him with the professions of friendship and intimacy
“I am so sorry for the poor count,” said the visitor. “He is in
The father and mother came into the room and gave the betrothed couple
to him senseless, he understood and was not surprised at it.


his tumbler, and adding some rum to it asked Mary Hendríkhovna to stir
“God grant only that Prince Kutúzov assumes real power and does not
the sounds of music that had immediately struck up. Behind him walked


all stared in timid bewilderment at the strange, long-haired commander
Russian commanders was the one naturally suggesting itself, namely, a
debts and to rebuild his houses, Pierre still maintained that he had
life, he felt an unaccountable tenderness for this young man and made up
cost money! How can you chuck it in like that or shove it under the cord
Bourienne. Princess Mary felt his look with a painfully joyous emotion.
seemed to him meaningless and even ridiculous. His anger with his wife

treated them with absent-minded contempt.

desired to be a military commander.

put those who did not take an active part in the affairs of the lodges
itself. But the idea that he, L’russe Besuhof, was destined to set a

said through her tears that there was nothing to prevent her marrying,
“Wants to turn on the other side,” whispered the servant, and got up
looked round to see where the smell came from. Next he thought of that
demonstrations of love of Bourienne.
he accepted the role of head of the Moscow opposition. In spite of this
out to them.




Arakchéev, or Prince Volkónski, or was given this or that advice and did
was so much interested in that task that he was unable to sleep, and
engaged; he was shouting “Hurrah!”

disputes about Buonaparte which would be inevitable. In any case it will
the Minister of War.”
strove toward the infinite, the eternal, and the absolute, and could

“I only wonder that the fate of Russia could have been entrusted to such
With Sónya’s help and the maid’s, Natásha got the glass she held
toward the fire.
against one of the columns in a respectful attitude implying that he,
to reach the boundary strip in sixteen paces. A whizz and a thud! Five

at first impossible to enter the drawing room door for the crowd of
adjutant to Raévski’s Redoubt. His horse lagged behind the adjutant’s
and very old people was particularly evident in her. Her life had

the calamities that would follow the abandonment of the city and the
grateful for the benefits conferred on them. Everywhere were receptions,
breadth the solution of the question, which has another, opposite, side,

At the moment the door opened and the stranger came in, Pierre felt a
by the talk of the maids in the next room (which was theirs) and by the
absorbed the greater part of his vital energy. He did nothing, did
When Michael Ivánovich went in there were tears in the prince’s eyes

I was really serving my sovereign and the Fatherland, but it turns out



one would have to... the Metropolitan himself... and even then it
everything seemed simple and natural.
had said when inviting him. The prospect of that dinner in the intimate
room, they still heard the laughter and merry voices trying to persuade
be proud of it! And on my honor, in spite of the cough I caught there, I

“O, Natásha!” Sónya suddenly almost screamed, catching her companion’s
convenient opportunity to detach themselves and to surrender on the
Prince. And God only knows where your man Peter is,” said the other
Prince Andrew went out.
The card tables were drawn out, sets made up for boston, and the
Pávlovna whispered the next words in advance, like an old woman
ago to have punished him,” he thought. And giving her no further reply,
says...”
Yet he loved “our Russian peasants” and their way of life with his whole
“A present to Your Majesty from the Empress.”
seen. Prince Andrew stopped and began examining the position.
men, seemed so immeasurably above him, an insignificant officer of the

There were in the room a child’s cot, two boxes, two armchairs, a
his dream of happiness.
Pierre then explained that he had loved this woman from his earliest
scarcely moving their legs, and dead ones that have not been cleared
There were only three tumblers, the water was so muddy that one could
The countess was upset by her friend’s sorrow and humiliating poverty,

Prince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance with whoever was
not Christians to ask it! Selivánov, now, did a good stroke last
the child down and ran with her to the large house. It was now, however,
“Well begin!” said Dólokhov.
action and its investigation, and according to the greater or lesser
violet into gray and milky white, and “boom!” came the report a second


September, and except for a mob in the governor’s courtyard, assembled


round her head.
have something to tell you. Here, here!” and she led him into the
When they had come to the edge of the forest it was noticeably growing

de beaucoup de mérite), a newly appointed maid of honor and her mother,
maximum. Kutúzov saw this and merely sighed and shrugged his shoulders.
Sónya passing with a glass in her hand. “Yes it was exactly the
to avoid meeting Natásha, but despite that resolution he called again
Through the cross streets of the Khamóvniki quarter the prisoners

incontestable. Certains droits et privilèges de la noblesse me
and a convoy of Croats. Beside Kutúzov sat an Austrian general, in
“Daniel!” Nicholas said timidly, conscious at the sight of the
elbows on the window ledge and his eyes rested on that sky.
with you, my angel? Are you ill?” asked the count.
some time to get the wedding ring off his fat finger. When that had been


“The Karágins, Julie—and Borís with them. One can see at once that
He quickly entered the small reception room with its still-unplastered
“Orders?” Denísov repeated thoughtfully. “But can you stay till
presence and you stand by! What does this mean? You will answer for
trousers of a battalion marching to parade, the rattling of wheels on
as of a settled matter. About the same time he received letters from
through the wood and lay down.” (He suddenly lay down on his stomach

felt perfectly happy. Just then the commander appeared on the bridge.
machine to imagine that a shaving that has fallen into it by chance
me! What will become of us? I am the wife of the doctor of the Seventh
the corpses over the parapet.

her, Princess?”
sitting motionless before the glass, looking at her face, and saw in the
countess won’t on any account leave Moscow till her son returns.”

understood differently, yet looking at Sónya she agreed with Natásha’s

The subject which wholly engrossed Natásha’s attention was her family:

Pierre’s remarks, rose and made a sign to his wife that it was time to

intent. In a third place a crowd of bees, crushing one another, attack
The soldiers went out again, and the orderly, who had meanwhile had time
public to appreciate his skill.


than a hundred cannon were already in the hands of the French.

side. The soldiers’ faces were more and more clearly visible. Rostóv,
and broke it up. In this action for the first time trophies were taken:
“All the same, Aunt, it is impossible,” he rejoined with a sigh, after

And he went on to inquiries about the Grand Duke and the state of his
will now be distributed, and surely a pardon would be granted....”

lucky man and, with his plain face, to be looked on as a sort of Paris
“Gabions must be sent for,” said he sternly.



From the direction of Olmütz in front of them, a group was seen

had promised Bolkónski. He was glad I was free to refuse him.”
hero Wittgenstein, this mood and the gossip of the staff reached their
shed, and on returning stopped by the door to play with a little
the generals espied him and, hearing what he had come about, informed
ever been in her life. She was at that height of bliss when one becomes
is an alliance of virtue: it is love, mutual help... it is what Christ
deliberately so that everyone could hear:
who had risen and was sniffing in the dark passage.
“No... Why should it be? On the contrary... But why do you ask me?”
“Drónushka, Alpátych has gone off somewhere and I have no one to turn
consciousness.
from childhood as quite an everyday event was wrong. “Is it just
were something new. “I understand the deception and confusion,” he
electricity. Atoms attract each other and atoms repel one another.
commander. Rostóv charged the French because he could not restrain
designs, and instinctively fearing that he might give way to emotion
draped over one shoulder, came into the space left vacant for her, and
Having arranged matters thus, Denísov and Dólokhov intended, without

should have to stand and guard equally cold and hungry Russians who
the event.
An attendant deferentially and quickly slipped before the ladies and
question, are like plasterers set to plaster one side of the walls of
From Vienna Kutúzov wrote to his old comrade, Prince Andrew’s father.

Andrew—promised to do as she wished. Having briefly and exactly
Joseph Alexéevich condemned my speech and my whole activity, and in the
this conjecture was confirmed by the sad tone in which her elders spoke
locks of gray hair.
satellites—the senior clerk, a countinghouse clerk, a scullery maid,


the voice of an old maidservant saying, “Straight, straight, along the
head slightly bent. His face was fresh and rosy, his white-plumed hat,
Hussars, ladies, witches, clowns, and bears, after clearing their
“Late! It’s nearly ten o’clock,” answered Natásha’s voice.
he was now even more experienced and skillful than before. Even the
like children from whom one can’t get any sensible account of what has
who—dreading this love affair which might hinder Nicholas from making
over the window to keep out the draft, and yet another waved the flies
eyes.
brandishing the slab.
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
a ‘corner’ and the stakes at cards meant, but carrying forward to
Natásha, stopping suddenly. “I feel so happy!”
punishes thee,’ I shall say,” thought he, imagining what he would say
wrapped her up in it.
and the victory of them that put their trust in Thee, and to Thee be all

“Ah! Very glad! Kiss me,” he said, having learned who the young

the night, reading it by the faint light under the green shade, did he
who, as they passed through in their ball dresses with diamonds and
that every event that occurs inevitably coincides with some expressed
plan, and there was no intention of retiring farther. The Emperor

Prince Vasíli always spoke languidly, like an actor repeating a stale

as possible to conceal his own part in the improvements that had been
the plan of campaign against Napoleon and, having induced Alexander to
free agricultural laborers—this being one of the first examples of
brightly lit up by the blaze, he felt a painful prick at his heart. His
more profound, more skillful, or more admirable,” and enters into a
Prince Bagratión to begin the council. At last Bagratión’s orderly
martial swagger in their clothes, and a touch of the gaiety and spirit
Just then another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince Andrew

pausing. “The only question is what will come of the meeting between
As soon as the sun appeared in a clear strip of sky beneath the clouds,
“Sophie,” he began, timidly at first and then more and more
a mild and attractive personality; and a personal grievance against
we were retreating from Sventsyáni we dare not touch a stick or a wisp
hussars, told them to follow him, and trotted downhill in the direction
any single action is due to free will, then not a single historical law
of feminine charm so strange to me now, is it possible that it will one
and come into line with the rest of the forces.

that....”
mistake in speaking about the distribution of the grain she wished to
did not suit her faded features, always played round her lips expressed,
the honors of the district, but was in reality a good general, useful
head in perplexity—perhaps because the banner really interested him,
“with her mother, isn’t it?”
CHAPTER I
history lies precisely in that force.
After supper Nicholas, having undressed in his study and given

“Why should we give up everything? We don’t agree. Don’t agree.... We
He pointed to the French guns, the limbers of which were being detached
hand on the edge of her box, nodded to her, and leaning forward asked a

“Immediately, I’m coming, I’m coming!” replied the princess hurriedly,
because fifty thousand corpses lay there, but even on the island of St.
Highness,” said the tall fellow with a triumphant smile on his lips and

young master. “Can it be? My treasure!” and Prokófy, trembling with
sleeve with her finger, saying:
attention. He screwed up his eyes showing that he was listening.
before going down she went into the room where the icons hung and, her
added, not noticing his visitor’s sarcastic smile.
of speech and of the press—and only for that reason did he obtain
rapier gracefully and politely, hand it to their magnanimous conqueror,
for some days in Moscow and was staying as usual at his father’s
to Pierre. He spoke in French. “I only know two very real evils in
“Oh, I’ll go across and have a look....”

“Where have you put it, Wostóv?”
“Oh, he is so kind!” answered Princess Mary.
are expecting him every day. The count wanted to leave long ago, but the
man. I used to meet him at Mary Antónovna’s,” said the countess in an
So the countess remained in the country, and the count, taking Sónya
anything and only saying now and then, “Oh, why did he go away?”
about to repeat his blow. Vereshchágin with a cry of horror, covering
talked about her health, and this pleased her. But sometimes she was

with you. I can’t.”


and interests before him! “Yes, they have taken a wise decision,” he
leaving them alone, even when they did not wish it. When Prince Andrew
prescribed small doses of a certain drug to produce a certain effect;
“They want to run to see how they have wounded it. Wait and we shall
plan for that evening. Sónya knocked at her door. Natásha did not let
her life, the thought that Theodosia alone had found the true path of

“Let him do it, let him do it,” said Dólokhov, smiling.

capable of receiving it.
alive. And then such a death... without friends and without consolation!
campaigns he had been in, told as by an old soldier. He did not himself
times whether N. and S. were members of our lodge (a question to which I
in chief with full powers over the armies and over the whole region
had crossed that line and not only was there nothing terrible, but
She already had power over him, and between them there was no longer any
fact.
was the duty of every man; that...” They interrupted him, for this
saying, and sat plunged in thought. Five minutes later, gently swaying
“No, no, please not... You are Mademoiselle Bourienne,” said
French though he spoke it badly, offered to conduct Prince Andrew.
The doctor went into the passage to wash his hands.


officer that it was all Denísov could do to prevent a duel. When
wives were created for them, Rostóv did not leave the lady’s side and
accompanied by General Bennigsen and Marquis Paulucci, had gone a second
Malákhov Gate, he had hardly dozed off in a paroxysm of fever before he
Goliath...” she whispered.

masses of the enemy came into view through the smoke, no one paid any

the shouts of the mob, the count began to repent. He remembered with

intervene. Prince Andrew looked at Túshin from under his brows and his
they had started. The colonel and some of his men got across and with
But Napoleon with his long experience of war well knew the meaning of
Vasíli had only acquired by imitating other parents.
Pierre’s coachman shouted angrily at the convoy of wounded to keep to
lunatic asylum...” All night long such announcements were continually
promised not to forget him, distinguished him above the other adjutants,


believed he would be reborn to a new life.
maneuvers suggested for tomorrow. It was proposed to make a flank march
Russian officers and generals after the Tarútino battle, letting it be
Princess Mary ran out to the porch, down the flower-bordered path, and
difficult to imagine any aim more worthy or more consonant with the
making his way out of the house through the brilliant suite when a
it. The commander in chief is always in the midst of a series of
the genius—of Murat.
send for a friend, now some expensive article of food for herself, or
directed to—Pierre and Hélène. Prince Vasíli mimicked the sobbing


the question of selection. Pierre disturbed the symmetry by moving a
The arrival of Dólokhov diverted Pétya’s attention from the drummer boy,
his own children in the battle? I would not have taken my brother Pétya
glancing at his master with whom he had lived on the best of terms for
    CHAPTER II
God, in the creation of the firmament, and in the miracle of Joshua the


refused without the least difficulty or effort, and was afterwards
he reeled and sank on the snow.
inclinations, allurement by the grandeur of the preparations, and the
Dólokhov said that he and his companion were trying to overtake their
But these words came like a piteous, despairing cry and an entreaty for
is, outside time, which is impossible.
“Goodness gracious! See her knife?...”
had to be made ashamed of their visits to the French theater and aroused


service he risked his skin and his life twenty times a year, and in
hand that was free, and turning sideways felt the pulse and reflected


with mild irony old times in Moscow and Moscow acquaintances. It was
in his heart his former love for her. Something in him had suddenly
weary, and distracted air, though at the same time he was haughty and
that year, as all his estates had been remortgaged, and so Nicholas,
as well as several droll incidents from his recollections of Germany,
increased by the fact that the Russian commanders—not having fully
Sónya’s first. He had read only a few lines when he turned pale and his

papers where human affairs and lives were indicated by numbers, Pierre

suddenly appeared, looming huge as an elephant.
study the common, infinitesimally small elements by which the masses are
rolled-up check kerchief in her hand. While still a few steps from
principals nor their seconds suffered for it. But the story of the duel,

in to meet the visitors, treading heavily, and vainly trying to appear
trembling voice to his coachman. The calèche flew over the ground as
“Ah, my dear friend, he is very unfortunate,” she said. “If what
“It won’t be just yet—someday. Think what fun it will be when I am his
“Russia is done for!” he cried. “Alpátych, I’ll set the place on fire
And the corporal leaned against the door and offered Pierre his pipe,

When Germans start being accurate, there’s no end to it!”
    CHAPTER VIII

He paused a little while.
bewildered him with fine words, and he is so flattered by his rapidly
wounded, and one knocked out,” he added, unable to restrain a happy


    CHAPTER XI
a young girl who stood panting, having just run in through the cold from
“What else do you expect?” answered the soldier. “She has no mercy, you
Talk in general centered round three melancholy facts: the Emperor’s
suburb.
sugar—and then run out into the yard to see whether it had done so. No,
what was the will of these individuals themselves guided? the ancients
and are drawn along.”

a domestic serf, about forty-five years old, with grizzled hair and a
Pierre looked questioningly at Anna Mikháylovna to see what he was to
Prince Andrew expressed his ideas so clearly and distinctly that it was
swaying in the gloom of the night. The lower stakes cracked more and
I have thought and thought again about your affair. You see, if you
Russian money which he had prepared: “Raising the use of these means
“Puff! puff!”—and two clouds arose pushing one another and blending
writes... Sónya...”
don’t remember Borís. I don’t remember him a bit.”

The count turned and saw on his right Mítka staring at him with eyes
first.
with that.
“To whomever Your Majesty commands.”
seeing eye to scrutinize the messenger more carefully, as if wishing to
leave of Rostóv in the club porch.
physical consciousness of her nearness. She was sitting in an armchair
misery. That could not be, yet he awaited with a sinking heart the
disorder. In and out of the hive long black robber bees smeared with

“Good!” said Murat and, turning to one of the gentlemen in his suite,
and the distinguished dignitary who bore the title of “Collector
“Well, do you think I shall prevent her, that I can’t part from
guests.


against the French?”
Russian army.
He ascended an incline, stopped, looked about him, and advanced to where
The soldiers simply held their sides as they watched him.
well-lit anteroom where they took off their cloaks without the aid of
can’t.”
“Oh, what a nuisance,” said Dolgorúkov, getting up hurriedly and
“Well, let’s have another bottle of this Moscow Bordeaux, shall we?

not what he had read that vexed him, but the fact that the life out
sumptuous but cold apartments known to Pierre only from the front

voice.
“Well, it seems that no one has noticed,” thought Rostóv. And this

and, hastily passing between the rows, came toward their box. When he
“He was gray, you remember, and had white teeth, and stood and looked
tell the truth.
drives me to it!” And suddenly with a determination he himself did not
defeated. A week after the gazette report of the battle of Austerlitz
woman, but there, just fancy! Those three got hold of a bear somewhere,
words, to describe directly the life of humanity or even of a single
pleasure that I am at the farm or in the office from morning to night?

Though Pierre, Natásha, Nicholas, Countess Mary, and Denísov had much to
Armfeldt disputes, Bennigsen considers, and Barclay, called on to act,
“It’s fine, lads! Now it’s raging... It’s fine!”
let Princess Mary pass into the room before her, the princess felt the


spent only half as much as before, and that his affairs—which had been
to fire the bridge, and now someone has gone and blundered; they are all
“If at least we had some women here; but there’s nothing foh one
Pierre sat between his wife and the old countess. He spoke of what he

whispered to him. “This happiness is for those who have not in them
Pierre could not make out what it was all about, and still less what
to recognize in this robust, motherly woman the slim, lively Natásha of
put a little aside and to send something to my father,” he went on,
quivered as he began speaking.
of Austria, and having, as his historian tells us, tenderly embraced the
impressions—such as the retreat from Smolénsk, his visit to Bald Hills,


and logical turn of mind inspired him with respect all the more because
Majesty,” said an adjutant who had come from the batteries that were
anticipating its movement.
“I don’t like you to talk like that.”
toward Kutúzov’s bench. But a militiaman got there before him. It was
“I did once, but gave it up. I am not fit for it. That’s it, come

Rostóv and Ilyín gave rein to their horses for a last race along the
circumspect silence of people who are leaving, after a funeral.

“and if this aim coincides with yours, you may enter our Brotherhood
Kalúga road and began to enter Formínsk, where only Broussier had
being moved, and the probing of his wound at the dressing station.
    * “Food for cannon.”
“What? Occupied? Vienna occupied?”
ribbon worn across the shoulder, and the mayor of the city will wear
others and, in shirt sleeves and breeches, went glass in hand to the


for this failure, the enemy placed ten guns to the right of the village
was there on the hilltop, and kept constantly looking at the patches
CHAPTER VI
infantry and cavalry and took up its appointed position. Not only the
bound by her marriage?
“Natásha!” he whispered in French, “do you know I have made up my
had written in Natásha’s album.
     * (2) “When in doubt, my dear fellow, do nothing.”
out into the hall with a pleasant sense of intimacy with his master and
had been hit—a large crowd had gathered near the second battalion.
home in Hélène’s house, which every clever man was obliged to visit—that

Pierre interrupted him.
Pierre did not come either and Natásha, not knowing that Prince Andrew
notwithstanding this, Borís embraced him in a quiet, friendly way and
go anywhere without him, and his failing health prevented his going out
when they went in. In her snug room, with lamps burning before the icon
yourself forward anywhere.”
When he woke up on the morning after his return to Moscow and his
them naked; smoked, picked out and baked sprouting rotten potatoes, told
it were a flail.
in November, 1805, announcing that he and his son would be paying him

was kneaded by the feet and wheels, while the rest rose and hung like a

listened to the light click of the steel needles. “Can fate have brought
The soldiers crowded against one another with terrified faces, and
Vyázma and Tarútino.

ambassadors to compliment the usurper.”
please!”

    CHAPTER X
mustache I don’t know, but I love her.”
“Because I hate ghost stories,” said Prince Hippolyte in a tone
to defend Moscow was a physical impossibility in the full meaning of
“All right, all right,” replied the commander, and turned to Major
compartment of Napoleon’s tent, where he began opening the box while
not, but you have no grounds for telling me so. And that is the whole
smooth as a sign that the conversation was at an end.
taken off, onto the farther bank, and reharnessed. The sun had sunk half
on the stairs, and the general, leaving him, went to the porch. The
matter might be he did not care, but it gave him great pleasure to
Túshin’s large, kind, intelligent eyes were fixed with sympathy and

Dólokhov has been degraded to the ranks and Bezúkhov’s son sent
oreille, voilà le mal. * Some want a thing—others don’t. What’s one to
self-derision genuinely Russian. Bilíbin wrote that the obligation of
Rostóv anticipated his horse’s movements and became more and more
feeling that arose in her toward the girl, she kissed her. But she felt
your father the truth when he was in favor, and in your case it’s my
matter of indifference whether he remained there for a few hours or for

history supports that view. For instance...” Kutúzov seemed to reflect,
seemed to express a secret understanding between him and them. And when
The traveler was Joseph Alexéevich Bazdéev, as Pierre saw from the
When he returned to the room Pierre was sitting in the same place as
Rostóv explained that he wanted to see Major Denísov of the hussars,
bloodstained hands, so as not to smear it. He raised his head and looked
All seriously thinking historians have involuntarily encountered this
campaign, I should feel dishonored, not only in my comrades’ eyes but
apart on a low bench, to the back of which a piece of green cardboard
did. “Home, I told you! And drive faster, blockhead!” “I must get away
comrades fully understood.
it to be alleged that he had been the first to leave the range of fire,
cheerful, self-assured old man; now he seemed a pitiful, bewildered
and pour out to him his indignation against the French and especially
go through your performance.”
causes him to kill him—thereby convincing the mob more forcibly than
sarcastic smile.
the Rhetor, “is an emblem of something not cognizable by the senses
and I don’t now.”
glanced round as if looking for something.
her a pretty and fresh young girl, with whom he did not deign to unite
will always be noticeable ahead of it. To those on board the ship the
and her look seemed to say: “Well, it is your own fault.”
between the person commanding and those who execute his command.
order. You are causing me to lose the fruits of a campaign. Break
bwing the first one?”
knew this outburst was unseemly and would blow over in a minute or two;
why did six hundred thousand men go to fight when Napoleon uttered

ascended the knoll from which, according to the doctor, the battlefield
sleeping before a battle.”
world!”
Denísov did not reply; he rode up to Pétya, dismounted, and with
movements are conditioned by the activity of the nerves; the soul and

“What for? I don’t know. I must. Besides that I am going....” He
are you dumb?’ he shouted. Still I remained silent. And what do you

in court circles the possibility of marriage between Napoleon and one
The scantily clad Hélène smiled at everyone in the same way, and
table seemed to feel this, and they forgot their duties as they looked
to buy his house and his estate near Moscow, but it drags on and on. He
At other times she praised Julie to him and advised him to go to
“Well, thank God! We’ve been sitting here too long!”

uniform rushed on him sword in hand, shouting something. Instinctively
available: some horses were carting for the government, others were too
“You flirt with him too,” said the countess, laughing.

“She has written to you. How she torments herself, poor thing! She’s
painful to think of the danger, since it is not in man’s power to
other details of life ordered by the doctors, the carrying out of which
what they were saying, she softly left the room and went to the nursery.
censure, but asked him not to be too hard on the poor old man. “What
“The campaign began only a week ago, and you haven’t even been able to
then, testing her strength, ran upstairs again, observing the result.
“But what is the matter with you, Count? You are not like yourself....”
a bold, free, and easy tone, while in his soul he regarded himself as a
The countess began to soothe Natásha, who after first listening to her
for the most part savage and brutal. One motive only they all had in
d’honneur of which Napoleon was himself the head.
Pierre, the one who had behaved so improperly at Anna Pávlovna’s
dreamed I felt that I was doing wrong, but could not tear myself away
paraissent être des moyens de soutenir ce sentiment.” *

second at Smolénsk”—he showed a scar on his cheek—“and this leg which as
anyone new—especially anyone whom, like Speránski, he knew by
relating to the condition of the troops on their arrival, and the
    CHAPTER VI
of Honor for the affair on the seventh of September,” he introduced
it’s definite and one is rid of the old tormenting doubt.” Pierre
In dealing with humanity’s inquiry, the science of history up to now

Nicholas and Denísov were walking up and down, looking with kindly
     innumerable churches shaped like Chinese pagodas.”

in life, one she had not yet experienced, irreparable and
motionless brilliance.
he added, and looked up at Pierre who was just approaching them.
Swaying his head and smiling as if amused at himself, the officer ran
not know. We only know that to produce the one or the other action,
labor but should die of it in a week, so he could not stand my physical
blonde. One is sorry for the husband, really....”
“You think so?” rejoined Anna Pávlovna in order to say something
“Lise!” was all Prince Andrew said. But that one word expressed
and those in which form prevails. To the latter—as distinguished
place was taken by a new and necessary performer.
crows flying from Moscow across the field, and when afterwards light
accomplished without all the preceding wars and without the invasion. If
“Vivarika! Vif-seruvaru! Sedyablyaka!” repeated the soldier, flourishing
bosom seemed to inhale not air but the strength of eternal youth and
“I’m glad, glad, to see you,” he said, looking attentively into
people to leave Moscow was false; on the contrary he was glad that
“What a dandy you are today!” said Nesvítski, looking at
before, just as he never could repeat to Pierre the words of his
victory or defeat, the glory of our Russian arms is secure. Except your
the Young Guards stationed behind the knoll moved forward. Napoleon
was all he thought about yesterday’s ball, and after his morning tea
now they were all bluish, lit up, and glittering with frost or dew.
French) to Prince Vasíli. “It’s not as at Annette’s * receptions
She got up.

For history, lines exist of the movement of human wills, one end
you not to indulge in trifles now, but to help to pack, and tomorrow we
and Sónya, and hastened to inquire after “Mamma’s” health.



sprang onto the box of the moving coach which jolted as it passed out
One matter connected with his management sometimes worried Nicholas, and
but you wouldn’t believe what a special feeling I have for you after a
Sometimes when she recalled his looks, his sympathy, and his words,
“But, my dear sir,” said Nesvítski as he drew up, taking off his
of it.
    CHAPTER XXXIII
ironic smile:
ashamed; he felt that he was occupying someone else’s place here
find, and still seeks, some secret motive in our actions. What answer
beneath his dignity to give me satisfaction, then...”
motionless presenting arms, looked again straight into Alexander’s
of State opened by the Emperor, and he spoke of it enthusiastically. The
your Frenchmen! Only wait till it gets dark and I’ll fetch you any of
very much! I have promised myself not to serve again in the active
sunny. She could understand nothing, think of nothing and feel nothing,

found, Napoleon also gave instructions that the Polish colonel who
consisting of a very handsome old man of Oriental type, wearing a new,
had witnessed without taking notice of them—assumed in Karatáev’s a
agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached
provincials,” he would say.
and Denísov’s, unable to make out what it all meant.
halted, the Austrian argued that not he, but the higher command, was to
“Well, are you glad?” Natásha asked. “I am so tranquil and happy

“He! dishonorable? If you only knew!” exclaimed Natásha.
no food), some with more innocent games, such as quoits and skittles.
schoolboy called up before a large audience for an examination in which

wounded, and Davout killed; yet at the very time the adjutant had been
Natásha looked at Sónya with astonishment. Evidently this question
“Yes, indeed, that’s a true sage,” thought Pierre. “He sees nothing
He had the letter taken from his pocket and the table—on which stood a
of horses had been sent up the highroad to meet the German doctor from

imagination, and “the bird restored to its native fields” galloped to
On the high ground where the enemy was, the smoke of a cannon rose,
Berg smiled joyously. The count, followed by his guests, went into the
nonsense, the chief thing is not to forget the important thing I

Rostóv went to Telyánin’s quarters.
brother-in-law, Nicholas tried to hide his wretched condition from him.


was dead—and Tíkhon reminded him that she was no more, and he shouted,

flee, considering himself lost. He pretends to fall into a swoon and

said that, if only the French made one more slight effort, it would

sins to answer for without that and that is why he has been banished.
white horse, followed by an enormous suite of discontented generals who

each time with fresh pleasure and each time discovered in it fresh
had been present at the beginning of the battle.
Ermólov.


all this time in Pierre’s soul, revealing much to him and causing him
“Mamma,” said Sónya, “Prince Andrew is here, mortally wounded. He is
he saw under her bonnet as by the feeling of solicitude, timidity, and

only in the heads of a dozen individuals—for the events and results now
Religion, the common sense of mankind, the science of jurisprudence,
mind.
him!”
father to the ambassador’s entertainment; she wore a ball dress and
about your mother? It would kill her, that’s one thing. And what sort of
held sacred, and therefore would not hear of refusing and accepted the
he knew of the French detachment.

into his room one evening in the official and ceremonious manner in
“We have orders to drive you off here, and we shall drive you off,”
remarks, recalling the doctor’s uneasiness and his wife’s delight, now
over a fire brigade of Bonaparte’s, that will be another story and
be very glad to do all in my power both for you and for this dear young
street mounted on a rather small sorrel horse. A huge suite of generals
bodices and white skirts. One very fat girl in a white silk dress sat
reality again presented itself. He got up without saying a word and went
“The Emperor?... No, a minister... prince... ambassador. Don’t you
some wine asked for) that there were no more charges.
her brother that Papa was asleep and Mamma was in the sitting room, ran
delighted at the unexpected rapidity of his pupil’s progress, but could
“Well, all the same, you must refuse him.”
that very Bolkónski who had been engaged to his sister.
indicated that Natásha had some terrible intention. “The count is
entered the anteroom I heard Andrúsha’s peals of laughter and that meant
is one and Princess Bolkónskaya another.”
or the acknowledgment of the merit of the virtuous act, or the freedom
town next day. Pierre still considered that it would be a useful and
was feeling. Prince Andrew answered all his questions reluctantly but
thoughts, for in such matters, too, he had gained experience. He knew

At that moment Nicholas noticed the presence of his nephew. His face
pushed the guns and wagons themselves. Whips cracked, hoofs slipped,
die. And what do you think, dear friend? Five years have passed since
all the peasants had assembled at the barn by the princess’ order and



“Let me kiss you, dear old fellow! Oh, how fine, how splendid!”
Denísov, frowning, took the envelope and opened it.
from his shoulder and pressed her to his heart. His capers reminded
them off: we can hardly do it. But theirs,’ he says, ‘are white as paper
In the second category Pierre reckoned himself and others like him,
Only by watching closely moment by moment the movement of that flow and


see!”
Tsar about it too. Anyone who stays is a traitor to the Tsar. Do you
Bonaparte himself! I remember his limited, self-satisfied face on the
old-fashioned coat and powdered wig and, aroused by anyone, told his

prince’s question as to how she felt.
for girls and boys.”
everything depend on her daughter’s inclination. She invited Nicholas
Vasíli to Anna Mikháylovna. “Go and take something, my poor Anna
peoples for such a misunderstanding, and consents to withdraw your
No one answered.




very pleased. Vasílich, you’ll see to it. Just unload one or two carts.
“Devil take ‘em!” he muttered, while his head was still covered by
Andrew was galloping along in a post chaise enjoying the feelings of a


once.”
event.


Murmurs arose among the wounded who were waiting.

right flank too extended,” he went on. “That’s all nonsense, there’s
clouded his mother’s face, and he smiled slightly.
gave zest to his pleasures. He spent the greater part of his time away
the strength of that impetus was exhausted and no fresh push was
when he would go. Pierre noticed this but could not go. He felt uneasy

She is so... you know?... Unpleasant... But my fiancée!... Well, you
“Dearest... and me!”
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
boldly, “if you wish to refuse one who is not only a brilliant and
hair in his beard or on his head, and his whole body gave an impression
with faces distorted by suffering, walked, crawled, and were carried on
officers (of whom there are fewer) perform the action itself less
“Yes, I know,” said Countess Mary. “Natásha told me.”

arranging the chairs and taking their seats. Anatole moved a chair for
“Can I see the count?” Pierre again asked.
go.”
clutching the handle of a lance that had been aimed at him.
side (only now did Pierre realize how near death his father was), and
said she, turning to her mother, who was tenderly gazing at her daughter
“The highest wisdom and truth are like the purest liquid we may wish
standards, and of the ground on which the troops had stood and were
that dinner was ready! The door opened, and from the dining room came
seriously. It’s no joke, this plot you’ve hatched.”
service is to serve under him.”
“What right has he not to wish to receive me into his family? Oh,
which the Duc de Bassano based his refusal to deliver them to him would
smile, “as it is not convenient in the presence of...?” He pointed to
Mary attributed to his being too weak to write or to his considering the

fought out in physical philosophy. Theology stood on guard for the
Prince Andrew had often occupied Pierre’s thoughts and now recurred to

brought in by the Dorogomílov gate and taken to various parts of Moscow,
young man he did not know, with a peculiar cross hanging from his
young shoots of grass were already sprouting, which taking root would so
during that time learned, from the talk of the French soldiers, that all
how handsome they both are!”
in transparent garments and with a transparent body, flying up to the
that the majority of the council voted for such a retreat, and above
disclosed the fresh gap between his teeth to which Prince Andrew could
pursued Anatole.
Túshin’s wattle shed was laid, with a bullet in his stomach, on
‘nonsense!’”
regret. Drawing rooms, gossip, balls, vanity, and triviality—these are

expecting to hear something very profound. At last he came up to Morio.
disgrace the whole regiment? Disgrace the whole regiment because of one
at five o’clock. There were no ladies present except Speránski’s
Natásha, she was seized by a joyful and superstitious feeling that God
had recognized in the corporal’s words and in the roll of the drums.
holding his nose as he ran past the men at work.
That reply is the expression of a consciousness that is not subject to

inflammation of his bowels, which were injured, were in the doctor’s
Forgetting his intention of concealing his knowledge of French, Pierre,
men sat together.

That same evening there was an animated discussion among the
ill luck takes us. They say we are going to Olmütz, and Olmütz is a
was all the harder for the Emperor to turn it elsewhere. Amid the
Nicholas, dear noble Nicholas, do when he hears of it? So this is

Reveries about Sónya had had something merry and playful in them, but to
“I say, come round some evening and we’ll have a game of faro!”
the meaning of the square and all the various figures of the temple of

crossed her path everywhere). “Andrew may wake him.”
were pronounced, Pierre, who had so long been considering his career,


quivering with emotion, his questions and his eager restless expression,

should be ready to begin again. I pity those who did not see it.”

soldiers, straining their lungs, shouted “Hurrah!”
This redoubt consisted of a knoll, on three sides of which trenches had
crouched feet and all in the corner of her sofa, nervously crumpling and
at her reflection in the glass. “She flatters me,” thought the
and Julie were saying to one another. The governess kept looking round
it, easily find a way to prepare for the enemy the fate he deserves.
