“What audacity! Hand it in through your commander. And go along with
to Petersburg, look round, and choose your profession. I will agree to
such an unfortunate and charming woman! Don’t mention him before


but, on the contrary, tried to reassure Balashëv. It was evident that
was occupied by the French, a proclamation by a French general that no
(Pierre was sixth), and were led to the post. Several drums suddenly
to get more money from the traveler.
Immediately after greeting the count he went up to Natásha and followed
was true and appropriate, yet, strange to say, everyone—the visitors
happy world of his own. She fancied a child, her own—such as she had
visitors and arranged about refreshments for the gentry and the serfs,

was just the Cossack, Likhachëv, who was sitting under the wagon, but it
up, he said: “I lay down and curled up, I get up and shake myself.” And
gully. She clicked her teeth (Karáy no longer had her by the throat),
for the countess.”
Makár Alexéevich came twice that evening shuffling along in his galoshes


“Forward, with God!” said Bagratión, in a resolute, sonorous voice,
That’s the way he was brought up, and everybody does it. But what a
It’s true he has been reinstated, but how could they fail to do that?
for his part tried to pretend to the count that he considered these
pointed to the assistant), “keep on here. Some five of us doctors have
how many battalions, and how many prisoners. Asking about the Russian
of the Russian David, shall suddenly smite his head in his bloodthirsty
pointing to the empty sleeve of his dressing gown. “Looking for
“The power is in your hands,” Dron rejoined sadly.
with a more tranquil mind.
“My dear fellow, how are you?” said he through the singing, making
terrible pain of being lifted onto the stretcher, the jolting while
the hatred of the French that all sons of the fatherland should cherish.
made no kind of deduction from or application of them. He replied to
feeling of pity for this man frightened him and he wished to go away,
of going to the back entrance where his carriage awaited him, went
All the rest of that day Pierre spent alone in his benefactor’s study,
days after the delivery of his speech at the lodge he lay on a sofa at
along the Ryazán road and nearer to its supplies. Subsequently the

erect, almost on tiptoe, with a soldier’s obsequious expression on his
all rules of logic, without premises, deductions, or conclusions, and in
a few of them still move, rise, and feebly fly to settle on the enemy’s
who pursued them, continued as far as Krásnoe without a battle. The
“The auditor wrote out a petition for you,” continued Túshin,
Pierre knew so well in his wife, revolted him.
of talk that came from the resting troops. There was no wind. As he

Smolyanínov, and it mortified him to think that the newcomer was an
houses at once, and don’t let one of your voices be heard!”

Nothing could be seen. Pitch-dark, brother! Isn’t there something to
exist, for then man’s will is subject to that law.
whispering, and betraying by every word and movement that they none
Bezúkhova, a brilliant position in the service thanks to the patronage
CHAPTER IV
through it—set off with Ilyín in the lessening rain and the darkness
“I know she will. She saw something last year.”


room.
“Yes, the oak is right, a thousand times right,” thought Prince
thought and which had formerly seemed to her so far away and improbable,
The doctor advised him to apply direct to Kutúzov.
police officers to guide the army to the Ryazán road. He writes that
“Very well,” said Smolyanínov, and went on at once: “Have you any


The same happy, rapturous faces turned to the shaggy figure of Denísov.
kind, sorrowful face, she suddenly understood the cause of his coldness.
behind them, another fell in front and splashed Dólokhov with blood.
“Spring, love, happiness!” this oak seemed to say. “Are you not
go.”
A king is history’s slave.
Russians had put their whole strength must have been mortal. But in any
silence.
now at Pierre.
already being reaped, made his calculations as to the sowing and the
“What?” said Kutúzov, in the midst of Denísov’s explanations, “are you
Five minutes later Princess Mary from her room heard something heavy
feeling; sharing with the young folk of the Rostóvs’ household a
gained for him the general good will. This was his acknowledgment of
again met Anatole in the little sitting room. Hélène had disappeared
inquiringly at Pierre.
at the council—the coming battle and the victory that would certainly
The great thing is to live in harmony....”
his door, which creaked slightly when opened.
She sat behind the bookcase with her eyes fixed on a streak of light
their energies. Beyond a certain limit no mechanical disruption of the



“My dear Anna Mikháylovna,” said he with his usual familiarity and
times has been presented in its whole tremendous significance.
with her hands she burst into sobs.
and no one knew where he was. The officer snatched a little food at
How bright and glorious was the setting sun! With what soft glitter the
in everything, so he frowned and did not answer immediately.
same commanders. The sailor rarely cares to know the latitude in which
that all Europe is powerless before him.... And I don’t believe a
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
all felt that this was really a council of war. The conversations all
and which he called his “will.”)

from within.

cruelty. Looking at his cold face, as he sat like a stern schoolmaster

been ready, but they still delayed and all were silent.
put down the guitar, and went to the drawing room.
these adaptations the reference to spring (vesná) matched the impression
demanded.
himself into a chair, gazing at those in the room as if asking, “Why
“No, my love; I am frightened myself,” answered her mother. “Now
intelligent men for his car and send a courier to General Kutúzov to let

accent.
looked at his borzois and picked out Mílka who attracted his attention
arms, another group of horsemen galloped up to the opposite flank, and
    CHAPTER XVII
who was asleep with his back to her, rose on tiptoe and kissed the hand
with Germans all day. We went with Weyrother to survey the dispositions.
The Russians, they say, fortified this position in advance on the left
icon. Well, and what do you think? He received his sight! It’s a sin

the pained expression his joke had brought to his sister’s face, he
of frost, when there were only seven or eight hours of daylight and
it was evident that he was old and stupid and that they, though not in

without going out of the house, waiting for the money his father could
could no longer be averted but was taking its course independently of
“And who are you?” cried the officer, turning on him with tipsy
shower shells on the Russian flèches and redoubts. This could not be
attacks. Both generals are angry, and the result is a challenge on
“Very,” said Pierre.

difficulty, went to the small sitting room.
the liveliness of a fourteen-year-old boy, and yet it was the face
Everyone again looked toward the door, which creaked as the second
about the Austrians and their uniforms, about their lines, about
Sokolnitz, November 30, 1805.”
his horse which would not stand still, then he rode out of the yard at a

“Yes, she is right,” thought the old princess, all her convictions
somewhere with the army and had not sent a word since his last letter,
so that she felt herself surrounded on all sides by the acrid scent of
dashboard with snow, Anatole and his constant companion Makárin dashed
recruits to our regiments; the fine weather; the long rest the Russian
which all other governments can continue in their customary course and
it’s magical, isn’t it?”

“He’ll get away!” said the esaul, screwing up his eyes.

enemy’s horse patrols could be discerned.
personal grief; they wept with a reverent and softening emotion which
Natásha did not want to go, but could not refuse Márya Dmítrievna’s

wars,” he said.
at any rate his light-blue eyes gazed for about two seconds into
throttle if they stood in my way. I have an adored, a priceless mother,
The dispositions drawn up by Weyrother for the battle of Austerlitz were
one trivial topic to another and repeatedly broke off. He stayed so long
him, went on reading his paper.

matter of indifference whether he remained there for a few hours or for
On his way home from Vorontsóvo, as he was passing the Bolótnoe Place
but at the moment of trial, without asking what rules others have
silence brooding over the house and within it held her fast.

desperation slammed the door with all her might.
were a few dozen miles separating it from its goal. Every soldier in
or not rubbed fine enough. After these fits of irritability her face
French but all Europe—except England which does not take part in the
composure, “now there’s this recruiting. My father is chief in
“Ha, ha, ha! Bravo, Nicholas Iványch! Ha, ha, ha!”

Rapp made no reply.
forth is equally right with the child who stands under the tree and says
change in her.
“Well, what do you think? They make soldiers of all classes there.”

Sónya among a minority of women who crowded near the wall, not having
took him by the shoulder, led him to the window, and began to talk to
it seemed to Pierre, sunk in profound and calm meditation. His servant
God, in the creation of the firmament, and in the miracle of Joshua the
But enough of gossip. I am at the end of my second sheet of paper, and

stamp of inconsolable grief, replied: “Yes, Princess” to all Princess
formidable wolfhounds, who had, however, grown fat like their master
on the basis of an abstract notion—science, that is, the supposed
he lacked that strength of will which he had known in himself and really

“I also wanted to ask you,” continued Prince Andrew, “if I’m
“You mustn’t laugh, Miss,” said Dunyásha.

faith with him—which he felt the more acutely the more he tried to
her; and she should have kept him talking till cockcrow, but she got

cher,” he paused, “abstiens-toi” *(2)—he articulated the French proverb
herself Anna Makárovna used to knit at the same time on the same
Pierre by the arm and pointed to a round, graveled space where a

but for an instant. Not only do we know this ourselves, but Christ, the
said Natásha in the tone of one being deprived of her property.
holding on with a boat hook to the ship of the people and himself
recognition of the possibility of everyone thinking, feeling, and seeing

“Then I may reckon on it, your excellency?”

At that moment, as the Horse Guards, having passed him, disappeared in
He jumped up at the sound of her light step.
turned away from the glass, making an effort not to cry. “And how


“So you think we shall win tomorrow’s battle?” asked Pierre.
to a third; and the vicomte was served up to the company in the choicest

On returning to Górki after having seen Prince Andrew, Pierre ordered
On Saturday, the thirty-first of August, everything in the Rostóvs’
his present state.
historical events, that is, as not subject to laws, is the same for
“Well, if you do, so much the better, and you can go back to her!”


the point, but it was evident that Kutúzov despised knowledge
“Wait a moment, I’ll fetch it,” said Mademoiselle Bourienne, and she
I have just returned from my benefactor, and hasten to write down what I
say to the adjutant that Borís felt uncomfortable. He turned away and
as clear as day, and can go so far astray. That is the only thing
Tíkhon, speaking of the Crimea and its warm nights and of the Empress.
liked to repeat to herself. It was the story of a girl who had been
out of a swamp by its tail, skin it, slink in among the French, or walk
“Do this for my sake, mon cher; after all, she had to put up with a
carrying a load of wood.
repeated. “I should be glad enough to fall asleep, so it’s not my
sacrifice my feelings and my honor for money? I wonder how Mamma could

everyone must have personal hopes, Princess Mary in the profoundest

And, having glanced round the room, Prince Andrew turned to Rostóv,
“How do you know?”
another, crowding, panting, and pushing, scrambled the soldiers and
at the arsenal: sabers, pistols, and muskets which could be had at a low
Alpátych did not insist further. He had managed people for a long time
The husband came up and sullenly asked his wife what she was talking
Andrúsha—the slender mischievous boy who had been her playfellow in

She only really took part when they recalled Sónya’s first arrival.


with the lassitude of age, sat yawning wearily with closed eyes. The

the inevitable conditions which always limit the activities of any
through Moscow, nobody came to the count any more for instructions.
footsteps beyond the door, both halves of it were opened rapidly; all
whole conversation with Kurágin, and again saw the face, gestures, and
who usually attended her had entrusted herself to some Italian doctor
straps, and these changed their familiar faces.
“With young Count Peter, by the Zhárov rank grass,” answered Simon,
When Germans start being accurate, there’s no end to it!”
CHAPTER XXIII

“In the meadows... in the meadows!” he heard, accompanied by whistling
desire to do good to his neighbor.
master. The masters, both the old prince and the young, and the steward
moonlight.
existence of such an incomprehensible Being, a Being all-powerful,
very briefly and vaguely, that after brilliant engagements the Russians
forgets either an insult or a service. I offer you my friendship. That

to Mozháysk on the twenty-fifth and to make his way to the very thick
with my hussars fwom here. And at the signal shot...”


dismount and stab the wolf, when she suddenly thrust her head up from
He turned round. Nesvítski’s handsome face looked out of the little
relinquishing that role and abandoning Moscow without any heroic display
with something more than curiosity and sympathy. He noticed that they
“No, Princess, I have lost your affection forever!” said
rubles, Dólokhov lived with him and had placed himself on such a
very wealthy. She was by now decidedly plain, but thought herself not
to elope with a blonde lady.
actuated by a real desire for peace.
and whether anything had happened to her betrothed, she assured him
blushing unexpectedly.
Their sabers catching in the bridles and their spurs jingling, the
him amiably but behaved as if Balashëv were one of his own courtiers,
expected was approaching. Hardly anyone he knew was left in town. Julie
were assembled near the round tea table at which Sónya presided beside
crowded closer and closer together. They advanced the few hundred paces
He remained silent awhile.
stern, and scornful monster among the smiling birch trees. Only the
“I’ll go,” said Pierre.

child’s little chair while, frowning and with trembling hands, he
instructions to hand it to the Governor and to come back as quickly as
feel) we arrive at laws,” so also in history the new view says: “It is
had been drawn up on the supposition that Moscow was still in our hands,
of whether he were heard or not.
And Pierre suddenly realized what a special, independent, complex, and
understand you” (she looked down). “Don’t imagine that sorrow is the
“Good morning, lads!” said the count briskly and loudly. “Thank you for

capacity of those who had chosen it. Others argued that a mistake had

And embracing her daughter, the countess began to weep for the first

noticed that her father was really associating more and more with the

had given up to him.
Nicholas and his wife lived together so happily that even Sónya and the

once the stranger closed the book, putting in a marker, and again,
of the actual battlefield. They began to meet wounded men. One with a

Kutúzov, but the latter moved his hand angrily and Kaysárov understood
a bent sheet of iron on the steps in the “reception room”—as
given away for nothing.
extraordinary may happen to one that honor and dishonor will be all the
dandies, the lower part of his face hidden by his beaver collar and his
Still alive... tenacious... serves him right! Torture serves a thief
terrible dragon, a lady distinguished not for wealth or rank, but for
electricity. Atoms attract each other and atoms repel one another.
This officer began visiting Pierre, and the princess used to make fun of
and amused as he was when he put on the little icon. “Did he believe?
dear fellow!” and for some unknown reason tears suddenly filled his
on a sofa in a far corner of the room. He closed his eyes and seemed to



before. As soon as I saw him I felt he was my master and I his slave,
of the oft-repeated passage of the sonata. Prince Andrew stopped and
“Where have you put it, Wostóv?”
confused happened there amid the smoke, and five minutes later our

and also very few domestic or literate serfs, and in the lives of the
quite mistaken if you reckon me or my mother among such people. We are
facing the quartermaster who was reporting to him. On seeing Rostóv,

to tell contained the chief charm and the whole meaning of his story:
punishments were to be admonitory and not corporal, and hospitals,
Had Princess Mary been capable of reflection at that moment, she would
foot, and galloped on.
drawing room.

French.
continuing to converse, and Prince Andrew involuntarily heard these
whole summer, from spring sowing to harvest, he was busy with the work

them when he heard a familiar, lisping, voice behind the shed.
bowed his head in sign of assent and approval. He rode off at a walk to
develops their greediness. Must tell Nicholas this.
his intention. He went to Tver to see Joseph Alexéevich’s widow, who
to him presented a majestic and agreeable spectacle. But the visitors
where we are really going in the darkness, and that we shall arrive and
the old count’s death, now after staying a short time in Orël—where she
This door led into a back anteroom. An old man, a servant of the
was right.
paying off the debts and undertaking new activities with serf labor,
activity of men and their historical movements, just as such a
The singing did not sound loud under the open sky. An immense crowd




began to cry.
answered Pierre, trying to remember who this young man was.
mother!...”
history has invented.
of years’ time.
Then a thin, pale soldier, his neck bandaged with a bloodstained leg
“Well, till we meet again...” he said, holding out his hand to
“Have you?” he said. “Well, how did it go?”
the Bedchamber. The diplomatic career now lies open before you.”


families of the Rostóvs’ and Bolkónskis’ relations sometimes came to
bold forehead that bent over her hand and answered his question by
After Pétya had joined Obolénski’s regiment of Cossacks and left for
him, and her eyes met his beaming at her. She set herself a task on her

author’s remark.
kindliness.
“Ah, Countess,” he said at last, “that’s a European talent, she
Prince Andrew had no time to answer. The servants came out to meet them,


“It’s our intended that was—Prince Bolkónski himself! They say he is

at all. Nobody will know and I shall never see him again,” she told
but the majority marched all night and arrived at places where they
of Sergéy Kuzmích and at the same time his eyes glanced toward his
“The word attack is always on your tongue, but you don’t see that we are
From the bottom of the slope, where the parleys had taken place, came

killed, and before the men had had food and sleep. And meanwhile, the

gazing before him with a smile.
as to who had taken whom prisoner, the Frenchman ran back to the battery
and behind the outposts and told him that his wish to be presented to
a man should not and cannot forgive and forget,” he replied, and though

lying—he alone could justify what had to be done.
    CHAPTER XII
French, German, or English people, or, in its highest abstraction, the
“Told whom?”

subordinates. “The mob is terrible—disgusting,” he said to himself
thought. And suddenly, at this thought of death, a whole series of most

Pétya was now a handsome rosy lad of fifteen with full red lips and
have the courier horses. It was plain that he was lying and only wanted
dining-room clock.... Don’t you understand? Narrow, you know—gray,
not to be trifled with either—in a word, he was a real master!”
Prince Vasíli, who of late very often forgot what he had said and

called power. This relation consists in the following:

“But I have nothing here,” replied Pierre, supposing that he was
the Emperor’s arrival and the beginning of a new campaign.
Moscow when Borís was a boy of fourteen, and had quite forgotten him,



follow with the things, and—now slipping in the mud, now splashing right
seemed to say, as with a scarcely perceptible smile he looked at
such a beauty! It pulls out and has a secret English drawer, you know!

our men or theirs run or do not run, and that this man or that man is
But there was nothing to come. There was no joy in life, yet life was
with them, giving final orders to the adjutant. After they had gone
    CHAPTER XVII


I was only joking,” he said, smiling shyly and trying to efface his
repeating the same words several times. She could not understand them,
some approaching achievement, and some in course of disintegration. He
life itself—is rubbish it is pleasant to throw away, compared with
election...” thought he. But now the campaign was beginning, and he had

bluntly—staining the honor of a soldier?”
feel that there was no longer a place for him in life.
men as well as bad,” said he, and still speaking, he turned on his knees
patroness. She added that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke
Princess Mary turned to Sónya and, trying to stifle the hostile

Oudinot’s carriages. In April the Pávlograds were stationed immovably
CHAPTER XI

once, to embrace the man she loved, to speak and hear from him words of



agitated him and evoked his sympathy. In men Rostóv could not bear to
limit of time in less than which no amount of heat can melt the snow. On
“Oh, take those off... those...” she said, pointing to his
someone there not of the conventional society stamp. And such was
who was now his only hope. Karáy, with all the strength age had left

to the Emperor Francis; he remembered the Minister of War, the polite
won’t get there till evening.”
“Well,” he went on with an evident effort at self-control and coherence.
adopted to lure Napoleon into the depths of Russia, and this plan some

the girls—“tomorrow I’ll take them first to the Iberian shrine
skeleton, with a stern sallow face and eyes intently fixed on Rostóv.

and looks of those who had seen them together. He recalled Anna
others appreciated Prince Hippolyte’s social tact in so agreeably

“How can the Emperor be undecided?” thought Rostóv, but then even
with his feelings but with the very possibility of life. Life without
come in a moment. Petrúshka!” he called to his valet: “Come here,
the middle, unfastened, exposing their sunburned collarbones, impressed



to pieces without me—everyone was pulling his own way. But I succeeded
the manager of all his affairs, and while looking with pleasure at the
“I know who has taken it,” repeated Rostóv in an unsteady voice,
white hands—the fate of Russia. Prince Andrew was struck by the
where his tea was handed to him; Mílka, the old gray borzoi bitch

don’t trouble yourself further.”
                        z
music. Amid these sounds, only the youthful kindly voice of the Emperor
wards of the city. You will recognize them by the white ribbon they will
“Ready, ready, dear fellow!” said Karatáev, coming out with a neatly
the other dark, shaggy, and sinewy, with a flat nose. The third was
Markóv immediately dropped his own beside it and picked it up without
fought out in physical philosophy. Theology stood on guard for the
Tarútino. The news of that battle of Tarútino, unexpectedly received
all the Moscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as
and a ball flew whistling over the heads of the hussar squadron. The
some painted cardboard representing trees, and at the back was a cloth
feeling stronger than friendship sprang up between them; an exclusive
“It was the officer, your honor, stained it,” answered the
seen, as the military scientists might convince themselves by the
rumors were current in the town. Some said that no one was to be allowed

they still brought up the charges, loaded, aimed, and applied the match,
Natásha, that winter, had for the first time begun to sing seriously,
the military regulations or of the arrangement of the Ryazán serfs’
Rostóvs, and the party became unquestionably exactly like all other
out a traitor! They slander him as a traitor, and the only result will
told the count such vile, disgraceful things about us, especially about

exactitude, what minuteness, what knowledge of the locality, what

Alpátych turned his face to Prince Andrew, looked at him, and suddenly
When the body, washed and dressed, lay in the coffin on a table,

displease you. However,” he added rising, “you know my name and
with France, a rupture which, according to them, ought to be promptly
with Uvárov’s cavalry at midday, and on the other side, beyond Utítsa,
and that that law is untrue, but man, who is the subject of history,
to public affairs, or possibly to family concerns.

fields of winter rye, downhill where snow still lodged near the bridge,
elders.

“Your Majesty,” replied Balashëv, “my master, the Emperor, does not

having abandoned all the rest and all his cannon, and having crossed the
letter:
the conception of the infinitely small, and the resulting geometrical
dragged home with him, and Berg who spent whole days at the Rostóvs’
letter, he now was.

Emperor from Petersburg. Before the news of the abandonment of Moscow
lack of news, the loss of Kutáysov, and the death of Hélène.
    CHAPTER II
there. From time to time he heard a soft rustle and at times a sigh.
inevitability itself, that is, a mere form without content.
Little Túshin, moving feebly and awkwardly, kept telling his orderly to

at once, did not know how to do it. But again the sense that she
whole army! “I needn’t have been in such a hurry to pray about today,
examination, yet to disclose his rank and position was dangerous and

wished to ask the countess and you to do me the honor of coming to tea
has abandoned himself altogether to this mysticism” (Pierre could not

that he can order me about. I will certainly go to the French camp with
were heard in the room. Natásha looked round at her, and then, red
Pierre, having decided that until he had carried out his design he would
On the twenty-ninth of May Napoleon left Dresden, where he had spent
other causes for it, but as soon as an event occurs—be it what it
Natásha’s face and eyes would have to tell her all more clearly and

quiet authority, “you wish to insult me, and I am ready to agree with

Natásha, and Sónya, and will certainly never touch a card again.” At
A third of the visitors had already arrived, but the Rostóvs, who were
at the ball. Apart from considerations of politeness which demanded the

and listened to stories of Potëmkin’s and Suvórov’s campaigns, or
be parted from her) would be gained, so pacifying himself with this
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
    CHAPTER XVII
soldiers were in marching kit with knapsacks and shakos that had metal
only the beginnings of marriage and not its whole significance, which
and more regularly and rapidly, and the action at the Goldbach Stream
deter Denísov. All that he now wanted to know was what troops these were
“All right,” said Pierre, still smiling in the same way. A feeling
to the big table. Not only was Pierre’s attempt to speak unsuccessful,
gentle daughter and the pretty Frenchwoman who were reverently devoted
“Is the carriage ready?” he asked again.
“I don’t even know what is in this paper,” said the younger of
up tomorrow. But you will see everything for yourself when you get to
mock me so... and now!” He was in a state of physical suffering as if
martyr’s death for his sake. Then Robespierre was beheaded for being
probably an ambuscade there.
to her on the day of his death. “Dear-est!” she repeated, and began
an entreaty, a threat, and above all conviction that she would herself
hussars, told them to follow him, and trotted downhill in the direction

Willarski felt dull in Orël and was pleased to meet a man of his own
Anna Mikháylovna, who always knew everything that passed in the house,
entertaining supposition.
“Do you know, I really believe she is un petit peu amoureuse du jeune


“Haven’t you robbed people enough—taking their last shirts?” said a

living without having solved the problems that so absorbed him. He had
just as Nicholas turned to her she raised her head and met his look with

camp.
personalities, and the less was it possible to arrive at any general
later he heard footsteps and Princess Mary entered with Natásha. Natásha
of Paul I of Russia who recognizes his government; chance contrives
“Where to?”
of sale for them: (1) From today, peasants, husbandmen, and those
except Monsieur de Castrès.

“Lise, I beg you to desist,” said Prince Andrew still more
biography of Napoleon and of certain people favorable or hostile to him;
and drowsy Kutúzov, who reluctantly played the part of chairman and

it. If you refuse him on my account, I must tell you the whole truth. I
effective—the peasant laborer. When Nicholas first began farming
his eyes significantly.
Ryazán, Vladímir, and Shúya was very long and, as post horses were not
When Paris was mentioned, Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seized the
and sniffing at her singed hair. The woman’s husband, a short,
intention of contradicting it. Since the campaigns of Austerlitz and
“He chose his friends badly,” interposed Anna Mikháylovna.
They stood silent, facing one another. The old man’s sharp eyes were

the number of our troops and the position in which our army and our
wagons, drawn by French horses and by saddled Cossack horses that had
     Come to calm the torments of my gloomy retreat,
in the garden.
him. Pale, frightened people were doing something around the workman.
“He asked you, and Vasíli Dmítrich * is also going.”
eh? Yes, a nice stepmother little Nicholas will have! Write and tell him
“Hark at them roaring there in the Fifth Company!” said one of the
her hind legs, lay down like a hare, and then suddenly jumped up and
Pávlovna whispered the next words in advance, like an old woman
saying.
horses, so that though everything has been packed up since morning, her
alien face of that man, his bayonet hanging down, holding his breath,
but at irregular intervals, and grapeshot cracked and rattled onto the
“Well?” he asked.
character recurred to her mind; and while thinking of her nephew she
never says anything stupid. She says little, but what she does say is
They all plainly and certainly knew that they were criminals who must
seemed to him all the interests that engrossed Napoleon, so mean did his
from the forest that skirted the highroad a large French convoy of
dear general, I am engaged with rice and cutlets, look after military
thank heaven, without offense. Among these folk, too, there are good

expressed their wonder at how it had all happened, and at the evident
Borís inquired what news there might be on the staff, and what, without
she was with them. Natásha grew pale, in a panic of expectation, when

that the National Convention, the Directory, and Bonaparte were mere
snuffbox while trying to hear what was being said at the other table.
“Can we arm ourselves against our teachers and divinities? Look at
missed several chances of forcing an engagement. In August he was at
asked to gain time.
and, as you know my principles, I refer it to you.”
What did you commit by so acting? A venial, or a mortal, sin? A venial
“Yes. Savélich says I must!”
blissful feeling such as he had not experienced for a long time. All the

and distinguished from everyone else in the world. Napoleon merely laid


wouldn’t have been nothing left of him! I tell you surely....”
asleep unexpectedly in the daytime, but at night, lying on his bed
“Believe me, Prince, a mother’s heart will never forget what you

of his own, goodness only knows why, he leaves me and locks me up alone

himself, “but I can’t coerce my feelings. If I love Sónya, that
for!”
she was so tired of talking of what did not interest her, and her
with exasperation, symptoms of a growing attachment between her son and

“Why, you said yourself you don’t want even to see her. She is a very

the gates, a group of undertakers, who hid whenever a carriage drove up,
What force moves the nations?
“By the Lord Jesus Christ, I thought we had put something under him!”
and his son.”
tell her everything!” said she to Pierre. “One hasn’t the heart to scold
confidentially.
most important that the sinewy white arm he was flourishing should be
Natásha’s intermediacy, to remind him of his promise, and then
Neither in Moscow nor anywhere in Russia did anything resembling an
by a feeling of desire while stooping over the snuffbox at Anna

flèches. The smoke spread out before them, and at times it looked as if
reply.
them sounded quick ringing bells and they caught confused glimpses of
seized a biscuit, and as if fearing to be too late, again shouted
“Not unto us, not unto us, but unto Thy Name!... I too am a man like the

Only when the victim ceased to struggle and his cries changed to a
Rostóv spurred his horse, called to Sergeant Fédchenko and two other
as the guest of honor, to enter first. Bagratión was embarrassed, not
After the condescending surprise, nonrecognition, and praise, from those
splendid house!”

Ferapóntov. “What has been decided?”

sunbeams. In front, beyond a hollow dale, could be seen the enemy’s

CHAPTER XI
inner voice told her that now or never her fate would be decided, and

“Here, eat a bit, sir,” said he, resuming his former respectful tone as
same Kutúzov who in August had been chosen commander in chief
standing they could see the French. Immediately beyond the forest, on a
the word angina was repeated with great satisfaction.
fourteen-year-old Pétya rushed in delightedly, to say that some mummers
“Where? Where?” asked Pierre.
“To endure war is the most difficult subordination of man’s freedom to
rose that was slipping on her bodice, settled herself beside him.
his lessons, teaching him Russian and music herself, and talking to
merely as good-looking as before but even far more attractive. She
plain that he had had a lesson) and stopped behind the count. This
would get on together. The husband, however, did not seem to share that
Kutúzov: ‘Your Emperor and the Fatherland award you this honor.’”
he needs money for food; the man said an officer had once given him a
As much as I like and as I like!” said Pétya to himself. He tried to

no one will ever know it.” And his soul felt calm and peaceful.
praised. “We have had an explanation today.”
Freemasons to which he was bound by oath and which preached perpetual
agree on, and if a seller is unable to obtain a fair price he will be
which forms an impenetrable veil between us and the Eternal? Let us
“To the health of our Sovereign, the Emperor!” he cried, and at the
exchanged looks and smiled contemptuously at this general’s senseless
military service has consisted and will consist in this compulsory and
niece passed, “Sónya, won’t you write to Nicholas?” She spoke in a soft,
satisfied....”


direction he himself prefers, regards those as leaders who, owing to the
even conceive that Napoleon together with other influences was the cause
preserved all that was good in it—equality of citizenship and freedom
“But it’s all the same now,” Pierre could not help saying.
shining eyes. With a movement full of dignity and grace she half rose
improved by the change. Probably Prince Andrew’s thought interested
dubiously. And this silence about Dokhtúrov is the clearest testimony to
dangerous business, and if you think about it—a stupid business. Well,
trouble, and silently fixed his eyes on Bagratión as a schoolboy who
nor even listen to the music; she saw only the painted cardboard and the

went to the carriage.
plague does not touch him. The cruelty of murdering prisoners is not
another, and the sound of hundreds of seemingly merry French voices
blushing—“of asking the commander in chief. He has had a letter from
Napoleon and Alexander, but we shall be unable to consider them to
can be happy and entirely free, so there is no condition in which he
“For what have you come hither?” asked the newcomer, turning in
he stopped short on his heels, stood so a second, stamped on the spot
moved noisily, their runners squeaking. At first they drove at a steady
and opened the door for him.
neighbor? No! You have spent your life in idleness. Then you married, my
“Yes,” said Rostóv as if it cost him a great deal to utter the

Nicholas and for ingratitude. Sónya listened silently with downcast
consolation for our defeat by the memory of former victories; and the



“That was a real battle,” said an old soldier. “It’s the only one worth
and his excitement. At the same moment Natásha, without drawing

“Which is the senior?” he asked, on seeing the prisoners.


I can’t analyze her at all. She is enchanting, but what makes her so I
The Mason did not move and for a long time said nothing after this
talks with experts, tried to form a definite opinion about it. But the


half in earnest; but Natásha noticed that her father was flurried on
proceeding, he walked deliberately down the carpeted gangway, his sword
dropping into his usual after-dinner nap, and laughed at everything.
“If only they would be quick!” thought Rostóv, feeling that at last

plain enough as it is.”
smile that usually brightened her face. Pierre knew that everyone was
to a different world and who could not know and understand his past. As
“Good!” said the Rhetor quickly, apparently satisfied with
Vasíli went on, testily pushing away a little table without looking at
fierce blow jerked his head to one side.

The movements of the Russian and French armies during the campaign
over like a ball. The hare arched his back and bounded off yet more
Kutúzov to the Emperor. “I can neither punish him if he does wrong nor
that whole nation to submit. An army gains a victory, and at once the
equipped himself with a mental telescope and looked into remote space,
“Will you have them fetched back?”

commander in chief’s regarding the regiment. Behind Kutúzov, at a
Princess Mary heard his words but they had no meaning for her, except as
“Oh my God! Why?” Nicholas cried in despair.
and asked how much he owed.
Vladímirovich Bezúkhov. If he will not assist his godson—you know
to obtain a transfer from the militia to the active army. Sónya was in
eye he had lost, Kutúzov walked with plunging, swaying gait into
he is asking for you....”
Petersburg during those last four months as if it were something new. He
Pierre) had not replied, had suddenly taken a very large dose of the
A minute later the old man’s large stout figure in full-dress uniform,

It was growing light, the sky was clearing, only a single cloud lay in
“little Nicholas can’t go out today, it’s very cold.”
vicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess. In the first moment of
important these pictures appeared to me, with what profound meaning they

Your Majesty, in the goodness of your heart, should allow yourself to be
of appearing a ruler and a source of power, becomes an insignificant,
doctor’s wife, who was calling him her deliverer, and recalling with


self-satisfaction and enthusiasm, Natásha with a quiet, happy smile.
Danube covered with pine forests, with a mystic background of green
Moscow, and of how some German fellow had been brought to Rostopchín
expressed to Pierre, he diligently followed all that went on, received

misunderstanding. I expect you feel it so yourself. Let us write her
it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
Frenchman, holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent

you won’t require it. We’ll go into the accounts later.”

been so much in the grip of inevitable laws, which compelled him, while
sad voice, as if saying: “Very well, finish me off.”
and with a deep bow would ask them to help him. The gentlemen always
“But what nonsense I have been saying to the governor’s wife!” thought
doubted the necessity of taking an active share in life, just as a month
always happens in such cases rivalry sprang up as to which should get

and the burning of an arm with a ruler as a proof of love did not seem
caught her up. It was lucky the maids ran in just then....”
on this), while she was very young. Thirdly, he had a son whom it would
“You know, Count, such knights as you are only found in Madame de
the Deity but from a man, which is, that the man who gives the command
else, but it took too long to dissolve, so it was decided that Mary
batteries, and so on, and who was thought to be and was spoken of as
tenderness. She could not believe that there was nothing to thank him

Prince Andrew nodded to him. He still looked ahead while Prince Andrew
“Time to harness, time to harness, your excellency! Your excellency!”
“Then you are serving?”
“And you, Theodore, get me a piece of chalk.”
“Of course I can.”

The French attributed the Fire of Moscow au patriotisme féroce de
unite he was displeased that Smolénsk was abandoned and burned without a
It was just then that he received a letter from his wife, who implored
“My carriage!” he said.
him.

barrier except the barrier of his own will.
does she bother me?” And she added, turning to Véra, “You’ll
birches that formed the forest, it was ten times as thick and twice as
midst of the momentary silence that ensued, “Count! One God is above us
“Go, Tit, thresh a bit!” said the wag.
After that he avoided Dessalles and the countess who caressed him and
purpose she arranged a meeting between the young people at the bishop’s
evidently understood Balashëv’s importance. He led him past his soldiers
the table for boston. The general sat down by Count Ilyá Rostóv, who

galloping off past Vasíli the Beatified in the direction from which the
“Well, your excellency, what? Your excellency! But what about your
Of the three precepts of Freemasonry Pierre realized that he did not
here is now settled, and I ought to have been off long ago. Here is
shirts for them.
“You were saying, Mr. Staff Officer...” continued the colonel in an

fifty-three minutes. He noted this down that same evening, among other
    CHAPTER XIII
After the French victory at Borodinó there was no general engagement nor
At dinner, at which champagne was drunk to the health of the new
say I’ll have his head off if everything is not here in a week.
from the one army and back to Valúevo from the other. Other crowds,
cut!”

Strange as may be the historical account of how some king or emperor,
“Why does she come prowling here? What does she want? I can’t bear these
me!” Rostóv whispered.
of feet be heard.
were the center of groups which even strangers approached respectfully
a shot, and our troops could be seen hurrying to the crossing.
possibility and rendered it not only difficult but impossible for the
every turn.
Véra, having decided in her own mind that Pierre ought to be

with happy face and sparkling eyes, raised his saber, shouted “Vivat!”


in the silence that followed the heavy breathing of the men was audible.
kitten which promises to become a beautiful little cat. She evidently
he, pointing to the prisoners. “Worse off than our poorest beggars.


interfere, making a scene on the very threshold of a dying man’s room?


father had forgotten his son’s letter on the drawing room table; but she
Drubetskóy, who had already achieved great success in the service, was
the streets soldiers in various uniforms walked or ran confusedly in
toward him and said something.
dull eyes looked at him in silence. It seemed to Prince Andrew that the
“Perhaps it’s the state of affairs?”
    CHAPTER XI
storm of rain and hail. In general, the summer of 1812 was remarkable
Toward dawn, Count Orlóv-Denísov, who had dozed off, was awakened by a
looted.
in a folding armchair, and continually cleared his throat and pulled at
their mouths, and fanned it with the skirts of their greatcoats, making
personal feeling became interwoven in the prayers with shades of its
Mary.

nothing except the people about him.
that it might not occur to her to speak of his share in the affair of
smiling. “Cela nous convient à merveille.*(2) Suvórov now—he knew

by the very nature of the case those who command take the smallest part
loved his wife, she died, but that was not enough: he wanted to bind
orders to get ready.
sacrament, allow him a moment’s peace! Here, Pierre, tell them your
of voices, the tramping feet, the horses’ hoofs moving in mud, the
If history had retained the conception of the ancients it would have

together? And there! Bezúkhov got off scotfree, while Fédya had to

Princess Mary was not in Moscow and out of danger as Prince Andrew
cloud, and the cupolas and crosses, the hoarfrost, the distance and the
inclined to think he had been taken prisoner because Pierre’s strong

“Because, consider, Count—if I allowed myself to marry now
whole.’ So he begged: ‘Take me to her, take me to her.’ It’s the
who were carrying the body of Pétya Rostóv to a hole that had been dug
Pierre wished to say something, looked at her with eyes whose strange

Circassian was Sónya, and that Sónya was certainly his future happy
lips.
“Keep in step! Ah... those peasants!” shouted an officer, seizing by
which he had reckoned up to ten thousand, but that now, as he vaguely
Nothing in life seemed to him of much importance, and under the
intriguing; in the body of the army they did not ask themselves where
but I say definitely that you must let me enter the army, because I
Pierre did not find his groom and rode along the hollow with the
he had met that evening.
center. Our right flank is over there”—he pointed sharply to the right,
A lump of snow cannot be melted instantaneously. There is a certain


to the visitor she added: “She is my youngest girl.”
on his face now.
assumption that everybody’s welfare depended on this or that issue

“Makárka” (their name for Makárin) “will go through fire and
ordered us to retreat, and all our efforts and losses went for nothing.
events, and bowed his old head in a spiritual sense as if expecting and
Rostóv dismounted, gave his horse to the orderly, and followed Alpátych
world she found herself in. All that was going on before her now seemed

That smile was immediately reflected on Pierre’s face.
“If I’d been in Nikólenka’s place I would have killed even more

journey he found himself in the open world and saw hundreds of new
those human wills, man’s mind postulates arbitrary and disconnected
Daniel.

were being taken with them.)
out into the town. When lunatics command our armies God evidently means

of states and nations increases or decreases.
she remained alone with him for a moment. Prince Andrew surprised her by
preparations made for the dinner; he saw the Russian and French colors
really changed, his brow became smooth, and he listened gladly to Prince
flustered voices here and there were heard calling and caps began to
at once showed itself by countless signs. These signs were: Lauriston’s
“At such a moment!” Prince Andrew repeated. “To them it is only a moment

encampment, and not within sight of the enemy before an action in
a war in the personal activity of a single man. Whenever I look at my

their own old, quiet, and commonplace life,” thought Natásha.

abandonment of Smolénsk to the enemy. It is pitiable and sad, and
The promised land for the French during their advance had been Moscow,
this bone—a bill for thirty thousand rubles—to the poor princess
always a right way of doing things,” replied the governor’s wife.
given a shirt to sew was in that shed.

together in a mass. Such action always occurs in wars that take on a
and unreasonable than a little child, who, playing with the parts of a
“Take a stick between your legs, that’ll suit you for a horse!”
overwhelmed with grief, left to the mercy of coarse, rioting peasants!
are clever, you are well educated. And what have you done with all these
“Sell us that horse!” Denísov called out to the Cossacks.
maintain the French troupe was costing the government as much as a whole
ends that were predestined.
Killed them, yes!” said he, frowning angrily and turning away from
the folding bedstead of Bennigsen’s adjutant. This adjutant was also
glanced at him and turned to Pierre.


his wife’s room. She was lying dead, in the same position he had seen
angry and swore at the French with the funniest curses. The only effect
head in perplexity—perhaps because the banner really interested him,
“Your Majesty is too kind!” replied de Beausset to the invitation to
understanding it, flushed with pleasure and began to kiss the boy with

been on his way back to Russia long ago had not his wound unexpectedly
rather confine ourselves to studying those sublime rules which our
be. Of the four crystal glasses engraved with the count’s monogram
correct. As soon as Bonaparte (who was at Schönbrunn, sixteen miles
