gallop round the room. Out of breath, he took the laughing child quickly
to Olmütz, dined there, drank a bottle of wine, and then set off alone
Chateaubriand, and the rest—but the sum of the components, that is,

further the accomplishment of a stupendous result no one of them at all
who had him under observation, interrupted:
impending action. From privates to general they were not expecting a
“The Emperor is extremely displeased that despite the strict orders to
tables. On the nearest one sat a Tartar, probably a Cossack, judging by

will begin. And he says Buonaparte is in Braunau! Shows you’re a fool.
Princess Mary and Julie Karágina.
heard, your honor, that a minister is coming to visit your honor.”
in front of them.
“Ah, Bondarénko, dear friend!” said he to the hussar who rushed up
desire war, and had no relations with England.
It was taking place at the English Club and someone near and dear to him
night was warm and light. To the left of the house on the Pokróvka a
Julie was at that stage in the life of a society woman when she feels

very day he gave the village Elder orders to collect carts to move the
“There was one like that,” said the doctor, as if pleased. “That

of, eh?”
long-drawn sigh she seemed to be prepared for a lengthy talk.
separate portions of the French army—first Murat’s (the vice-king’s),
“he’s going to clear up the whole affair for you....”), “in destroying
responsibility of that deed.”
and thud was heard, followed by a boom of cannon blending into a dull
finger at him, “I have even heard of your doings in Paris!”
and questioned him with an important air, as if considering the general
two thirds of a mile away, and it was more than a mile as the crow flies
with a friendly smile.
father, sighing and evidently disconcerted, very soon became silent and
Prince Andrew was carried in and laid on a table that had only just been
knew everything, could do anything, and was known to all Moscow—that
“No. All I say is that it is not argument that convinces me of the
came out into the frost and got into the sleighs, talking, calling to


tell of the influence some of these people had on others, and say: that
the hall facing an elderly woman of Oriental type, who came rapidly to
ran out of the room.

regardless of the difference of the aims set for the common action, the
needed in his angry mood. One of the first bullets killed him, and other
Two months had elapsed since the news of the battle of Austerlitz and
of the heroism and devotion of his troops fighting at Salamanca, at
with a look of nervous agitation such as Pierre had never before seen on
Pierre too drew near the church where the thing was that evoked these
in some way essential.
so that she understood that he had long been waiting for her to come. He
the arms, ammunition, gunpowder, and stores of corn not removed? Why
“Yes, that must be so,” thought Pierre, when after these words the
CHAPTER XIV
at any moment on the ryefield opposite.
in human affairs, and therefore history ought to give other answers.
and called him “Nicholas.”

very fields where the French had now to be fought; the adjacent
“Early tomorrow I shall go to his Serene Highness,” he read (“Sirin
consolidated. At Borodinó a collision took place. Neither army was
each of those present, and the advantages that might accrue. He took
for a few seconds collected his thoughts. Then the Russian ambassador
at this big, stout, quiet man, wondering how such a clumsy, modest

Only by taking infinitesimally small units for observation (the
Madame Schoss, who had been out to visit her daughter, increased the

gone from under her wing, that today or tomorrow either or both of them
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO

After seven years of marriage Pierre had the joyous and firm

countess knew so well and feared so much, and now she sat in the same
for Christ’s sake!”
some of the topics at first lightly touched on: their past life, plans

unbearable! I don’t want... to be tormented? What am I to do?...”

wives and children streamed to the southeast, to parts where none of
after his death, surprising everyone by the immense total of small
her glance and in every motion, she looked at the visitors and, with
finds you to his taste as a daughter-in-law and makes a proposal to you


yesterday and the question presented itself whether he ought or ought
“I don’t like you to talk like that.”
her with perfect sincerity, and with the naïve and firm conviction
not for Napoleon but always against him.
eyes. Then having satisfied himself that all eyes were fixed on him,
painful, but good, very good!” said Natásha. “I am sure he really loved
He paused at the sight of Pierre. His face quivered and immediately

to Toll.
“It’s shameful, sir!” he said to the adjutant. “What...”
her head out into the damp night air, and the countess saw her slim neck
Here the conversation seemed interesting and he stood waiting for an
him. This little dog lived in their shed, sleeping beside Karatáev at
commissariat affairs of his detachment, and could never be found when
with him not a commander in chief’s staff but the imperial headquarters
it!” shouted Berg, who was now assistant to the chief of staff of the
and a few days later left to rejoin his regiment.

“Who are you?”
The officer and soldiers who had arrested Pierre treated him with

    * “Get along, get along!”
Everything: her face, walk, look, and voice, was suddenly altered.
And as soon as the officer let go of the gate handle she turned and,
but to go home alone, see his sisters, brother, mother, and father,
By discarding a claim to knowledge of the ultimate purpose, we shall
white—as white as birchbark—and some of them are such fine fellows, you
glanced angrily at Berg, then, meeting his eyes, hid his face behind the

twot fo’ward!”
soul and his face.
his nurse sang him to sleep and he, burying his head in the pillow,
so contrary to his method of conducting war? Believe me, he is afraid,
INHABITANTS OF MOSCOW!
soldiers used to tell of an evening (they were always the same), but
telling me what forces are being collected against him! While you and I
went on to the game without omitting a single dish or one of the wines.
did indicated his unusual position. But Dólokhov, who in Moscow had worn
to everybody who has business with me. My head is sometimes in a whirl.



and silver of the men’s epaulets; servants in scarlet liveries moved
them Pierre noticed a large cast iron ring with a seal representing a
against the wall, and the second of the three sisters rushed out
(1) To whatever degree we may imagine a man to be exempt from the
but only to let them sit on the top of the things. But the work of
a universal favorite: a very pleasant position, and intoxicatingly so
suddenly find that we are not in Otrádnoe, but in Fairyland. And then I

of the sun. In front, far off on the farther shore of that sea of mist,
serious duel, and besides, Drubetskóy, who says he is an old friend
soldiers held him while two others were flourishing their switches and


acquaintances he had made in Moscow formed a current that bore him along
hunger and fatigue, need these supplies as well as a few days’ rest.

powder,” said Prince Andrew banteringly yet tenderly.

he talked to Pierre), the old man was sitting on a large leather-covered
fear’s all gone, and your only thought is not to let him get away!’
“You know, Michael Ilariónovich, we are not on the Empress’ Field
For us that movement of the peoples from west to east, without
we quarreled? And it was always my fault. Always mine. And what we
married,” answered the countess sharply and sarcastically.
Rostóv was not far from the trumpeters, and with his keen sight had

serving our Tsar and our country, rejoicing in the successes and
be anyone’s lackey, but I who have nothing but my brains have to
As if to celebrate a victory over everybody, a cricket chirped in a

irresponsibility for crimes and the extenuating circumstances admitted
to be fed and the sheep to be safe...” or: “They cannot understand

“Very pleased to see you, Prince,” he said. “One moment...” he
regimental wagons and horses which were standing in a group was busy
“I will make a match for you with the princess. Catherine Petróvna
The little princess grumbled to her maid that her bed was badly made.
Rostopchín had replied that he could not come:
who looked fatigued, was dismounting. Marquis Paulucci was talking to
hill.
them, with the evident intention of giving battle and checking the
On his way home from Vorontsóvo, as he was passing the Bolótnoe Place
them in his study before having a nap.


deceived. And I am off to the army. Why? I myself don’t know. I want
firmly in hand. And this is what they have let it come to! Villains!
tomowwow,” muttered Denísov.
“The campaign began only a week ago, and you haven’t even been able to
scowling brows above dull greenish-hazel eyes and an overhanging red
feeling of unpleasant awakening from the hurry and eagerness to push on
regular order.
regret her words. But she went on hurriedly:
in the expression on their faces—one of them glanced timidly at


anything else.... You have not been ordered to return and have not been
him to write an order to the troops and a rescript to Field Marshal
The scene of the third act represented a palace in which many candles
subscription was fifteen rubles a head, and at which there were two
Knyazkóvo with a crowd of soldiers, reached the dressing station, and

his wife, and by an anonymous letter he had received that morning, which
he had received news that his father, son, and sister had left for
“I peg of you yourself not to mix in vot is not your business!”


he had learned not by words or reasoning but by direct feeling what his
was even then understood. Russian authors are still fonder of telling
“Oh—why, that was in a dream!” Pétya said to himself, as he lurched
artilleryman to Prince Andrew. “Not like your honor!”
Suvórov giving his saber to Bagratión in Italy, and the recollection
come. Pierre got up and left his new companions, crossing between the
occasioned the Emperor.


not bring to a conclusion. Terrible doubts rose in his soul. Now he
the human race while ourselves setting an example of baseness and
to his leg a narrow unsheathed sword (small, curved, and not like a real
grown-up young people: Véra beside Berg, and Pierre beside Borís; and
him money under the guise of loans.
care about them in so far as they are harmful or useful. And most of
house.
Tears of vexation showed themselves in Princess Mary’s eyes. She turned
officer in the Semënov regiment with whom Borís was to travel to join


These gentlemen ride onto the bridge alone and wave white handkerchiefs;
All eyes were fixed on him. He looked at the crowd, and rendered more
understood anything of what went on before her. She only felt herself
Without such justification there would be no reply to the simplest

Pierre was one of those retired gentlemen-in-waiting of whom there were

“Gentlemen, you are crushing me!...”
hastily), “is in Russia, and in the army again. What do you think?”—she
not, it was decided at a consultation between the battalion commanders
advance, and the next day his army began to cross the Niemen.
“That is enough for me,” said Sónya, blushing.
The science of jurisprudence regards the state and power as the ancients
that the strange lady, the aide-de-camp, and some of the servants, all
Rostóv let go of the horse and was about to ride on, when a wounded
an evident effort to be affectionate, he said with his lips only (his

words—are only part of the general activity expressed in an event,
replies, nor how they would understand them. He looked at their faces


“Come here,” said Rostóv, catching hold of Telyánin’s arm and
“So you don’t want to do anything? Well then, say so!” Rostóv
engagement and his reception by the Minister of War.
showed that, in spite of all his love and respect for his father, he was
never be known to anyone. Believe me,” he went on, “if things
naked Hélène with her proud, calm smile, rapturously cried
him toward everybody and especially toward himself, but when he came
Swaying from side to side on his long, thin legs in his fluttering
campaign, I should feel dishonored, not only in my comrades’ eyes but
excellency,” said Timókhin timidly, and continually turning to glance at
what a pity.”
On his way to the house Pierre kept thinking of Prince Andrew, of their

Magnítski immediately assumed a pose and began reciting some humorous
bowed his white head with a deep sigh. Behind Kutúzov was Bennigsen and
feverish eyes at the door in front of him as if trying to understand and
misunderstanding. I expect you feel it so yourself. Let us write her


have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
her own fate and guardian and instructor of her nephew, was the first to

mean good French society—will have been forever destroyed, and
Evidently Speránski liked to rest after his labors and find amusement
they were ready to go to all lengths—which found expression in the tones
herself.
Braunau had halted half a mile from the town, waiting to be inspected
role of appearing to command, calmly and with dignity.
is so I don’t know...”
a look of complete absent-mindedness, kept rubbing the bridge of his
one night prepared for a journey and started for Moscow to see Joseph
Prince Andrew held her hands, looked into her eyes, and did not find
Behind him, where Karatáev had been sitting, the dog began to howl.
perishing, but could not stop, any more than the Russian army, weaker
glance at him.
Denísov considered it dangerous to make a second attack for fear of

touched Pierre: he looked at Hélène and she too seemed disconcerted,
stages with them had been captured by Cossacks, the other half had gone
summoned Lelorgne d’Ideville, the interpreter.
her mother in prayer, suddenly checked her rush, half sat down, and
spot he noticed a Russian soldier laughingly patting a Frenchman on the
every honest man’s duty to go against the government, and that the oath



considerable pause which made Pierre feel uncomfortable.


their own old, quiet, and commonplace life,” thought Natásha.
“Announce me. Perhaps she will see me,” said Pierre.
a company smile but was evidently tormented by jealousy; now she turned
way in which he danced the mazurka, Nicholas ran up to Natásha:
they ran out into the porch and reported what was taking place in the
discuss so minutely and acutely all the recent European military and
“Everyone has his Achilles’ heel,” continued Prince Andrew.
than never” and heard them repeated several times by others, people

most in people. As to his inheritance and the part played by Prince
“Where is it, that lofty sky that I did not know till now, but saw
tomorrow?”


condescension.
“Settled!” replied Borís.

And bowing respectfully, as if to a lady of royal blood, he moved toward
grateful look fresh in his mind, had gazed at the comet that seemed to
With the naïve conviction of young men in a merry mood that other men’s
Gírchik says the Ilágins are at Kornikí with their hounds. That’s
He put on the air of one who finds it impossible to reply to such
“If Prince Andrew heard that I was in the power of the French! That
And to all Denísov’s persuasions, Pétya replied that he too was
condemned according to whether they conduced to progress or to reaction.
well as children, popped out from the back entrance to have a look at
don’t get promoted to a sublieutenancy.”

Hélène laughed.

is all I have to say to you. The count is very, very ill, and you must
the pilgrims and the solitude which refreshed her at Bald Hills—and
warrior in our valiant ranks has perished. From this you will see that
CHAPTER XX
“And that other one with him, the Austrian, looked as if he were
which heaved with convulsive sobs.
Had Napoleon not taken offense at the demand that he should withdraw
at which there were always three or four guests; after dinner she played
they lost their discipline and rushed about according to the chance
with a mournful expression.
CHAPTER XI
Coming out of the hut into the damp, dark night Konovnítsyn
activity in 1812, never once swerving by word or deed from Borodinó to
“No, friend, he is sharper-eyed than you are. Boots and leg bands...
little way. “What’s the matter?” he asked.
soul to see such men as the old count and his worthy son,” said she.
with a serious expression, but with a smile lurking at the corners of
leaves and stems here and there. Farther back beyond the dark trees a

Polish Uhlans, a handsome old man, flushed and, fumbling in his speech
you not rest here?”
She rang for her maid and asked her to sleep in her room.
at him from her sable furs—so close and yet so distant—in the
had told her other suitor; that is, she put the matter so that the only
for the future, Pierre’s journeys and occupations, the war, and so
a cry of: “The general to the third company,” the missing officer
his own superiority. It was as if he said to them: “I know you, I know
embroidered court uniform, knee breeches, and shoes, and had stars on
and the magnate had proposed to her and that she loved both and was
and firmly that if he was not allowed to enter the service he would

sister,” was all she said, in a dry and mournful tone.
“Yes, I think so,” he said reluctantly, and left the study.

into the bushes, removed his sodden hat by its floppy brim, and
into effect with the aid of his associates, Czartorýski, Novosíltsev,
related to Napoleon’s orders to deal with four points—four different
by those troops that they were themselves in the front line and had
what was passing in his mind.

“Oh, dear sir!” she cried, seizing him by the legs. “My benefactor, set

You know that sort of tradesman’s son, a dandy and lady-killer. He
The society gathered together at the governor’s was the best in
“Bonjour, la compagnie!” * said he gaily, smiling and looking about him.

a fine place! Why are you not eating anything, gentlemen?” Nesvítski


Borís received no clear explanation of why it had been necessary for
They were taken to the entrance and led into the house one by one.

“Is it over?” said Princess Mary when his body had for a few minutes
Russian troops moving down the valley to their left.
his elocution, was to read it. (He used to read at the Empress’.) The
the icon stand. To her surprise and distress she found that her prayers
every loss, the liveliness increased more and more.
own thoughts.
good-for-nothing. When Kutúzov, conforming to a custom of Catherine’s
given out, everybody was escaping—going away somewhere, and in general
flattering to him. At first it seemed strange that the son of an obscure
inevitability without any element of freedom is just as impossible as
ran up, begging a little fire for the infantry.
good-natured tenderness of his smile vanquished her. She smiled just
moonlight.
relations with all the Rostóvs which had made her almost a member of the




bookcases with keys in the locks, the high desk for writing while
me to her so strangely only for me to die?... Is it possible that the
“And fancy! she refused him quite definitely!” adding, after a
with its talk, tea, and lighted candles.
“He lets one win the singles and collahs it as soon as one doubles it;
“Why, it’s a mercy if we can get the carpets alone into three cases,”
“Oh, what a terrible state he is in! One would not know him, he is so
who had halted. He stood on a knoll in the stubble, holding his whip
war or politics but related to high society, to certain women, and to
into the water. He tried to right himself but fell in up to his waist.
But haste was becoming imperative. Cannon and musketry, mingling

of the action and our judgment of it.
his memories, aspirations, hopes, and thoughts? Who was doing this? And
declared that he will leave it to the French people themselves to choose

Suddenly something happened: the young officer gave a gasp and bending

Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
against which she had argued, but divested of everything superfluous
“Leave my room,” she exclaimed, and burst into sobs.
time to say them.
have employed in loving him, were being vainly wasted, with no advantage
wrinkle comes and goes on his pale forehead. One of his legs twitches

the quarters occupied by the French were other regions still unexplored
in her as at something extraordinary. Only the old countess with her
event—from an endless number of most diverse circumstances and was only
Borís also,” she went on, gaining a little strength; “he is nice...


had all been thought out and he knew all there was in Sónya, but it was
while looking about him. Standing among the crowd of peasants, Pierre
booty fell in with the Emperor and very nearly captured him. If the
as if astonished at the word. “Well, you see, I’m building. I mean
Glory, which was similar to those threads but rather thicker. He and

duelist and rake, and every now and then he glanced ironically at
buttermilk, honey in the comb, still mead and sparkling mead, apples,

“No good... no good...” said the prince rapidly, and thrusting his
The count nodded affirmatively, and Natásha, at the rapid pace at which
physical satisfaction. “Go on, harder, go on!” he muttered to the valet
they had looked at it from the hill, the officer had pointed out as
Kutúzov only replied that movements arranged from a distance were always
her maid, entered the room quickly and abruptly with a frightened look

with luxuries, hospitals, prisons, government offices, churches, and

“What for? Why? What is going on in the world?” he would ask himself
migrations of peoples, the foundations on which history had been built
Platón Karatáev knew nothing by heart except his prayers. When he began

and the starlight of the winter nights seemed to call for some special
“Well, have you finished?” said he to Kozlóvski.
bwicks and it’s nasty work! An attack’s pleasant work! Hacking
and hopes that had been on the point of awakening within her and were

Murat’s emissary and retired, leaving Bagratión’s division
“I should never dare to say that I know the truth,” said the Mason,
intention of contradicting it. Since the campaigns of Austerlitz and


destruction of the Prussian army at Jena and Auerstädt and the
trying not to lose a word of the speech which was incomprehensible to

wounded soldier was so dirty, coarse, and revolting that his proximity

year?” said “the man of profound intellect.” “Why shouldn’t
CHAPTER VII
“There now, Denísov has been worrying,” said Rostóv, “and here

nurse’s French, at which he and Borís used to laugh long ago.
Orlóv felt distrustful of the adventure when he looked at the enemy’s
hussars began carefully aligning their horses. Silence fell on the whole
squatted down beside him.
belonged to. They belonged to a column that should have been far in
and the constant gleam of her white teeth, thought that they were in a

on till he reached Vereshchágin, a half educated tradesman, you know, ‘a
The countess put her arms around Sónya and began to cry.
reports one after another, and a third.
officer’s remark was just and that really no answer could be made to
of the unwritten code of subordination—looked so fixedly at the

possibly could?
subject. “I was told they are coming soon. I am also expecting Andrew
am only happy to have had the opportunity of making your acquaintance.
“What proof have I that you are not lying?”
The Rostóvs lived in the same hospitable way in Petersburg as in

“Devil take them!” he muttered, and after listening to the verbal


aloud to him and being friends with Princess Mary. Mademoiselle
His eyes, prominent from the emaciation of his face, gazed inquiringly
indistinct words, shrugging his shoulders and gesticulating.
and majestic voice that was yet so simple! And as if in accord with


As soon as he said this both Prince Vasíli and Anna Pávlovna turned away
that she winced and uttered a cry.
“God have mercy.... It’s windy and dry...” said another voice.


of view, presented themselves to the men of that day; but to us, to
oh yes, that French officer with the dimple. And I remember how my arm
blissful face “like a vewy devil,” as Denísov expressed it.
taste for what they call “serious reading.”
In April, Rostóv was on orderly duty. One morning, between seven and
“With a message to His Majesty.”
began laying out his cards for patience.
father’s room with the good-humored and victorious air natural to

medicines to drink, he recovered.

Rostóv.
him, were interested in him, and wanted to meet him.
“No, really! I’ll drive home, I must have left them there. I’ll
Anatole, for whom Pierre was looking, dined that day with Dólokhov,
tone. “Not ‘very good’ it’s simply delicious!”
when it was worth while going to certain death, as now. Then there would
village and stacked its arms in front of the last huts.





Rostóv and Ilyín, on entering the room, were welcomed with merry shouts
“Well, Karabákh! We’ll do some service tomorrow,” said he, sniffing its
standing together out of range of the shots, watching, now the small
irritation.
remained in reserve and Nicholas Rostóv spent that day in a dull and


who assume that the collective will of the people is delegated to
and until evening, the party had watched the movements of the French
“You are always charming and melancholy, my dear Julie,” she said to
Only to distinguish themselves! As if fighting were fun. They are
“At first I did not like it much, because what makes a town pleasant
as he pointed at the old men with his free hand.

BOOK FIVE: 1806 - 07
showed her.
“Your excellency!” Prince Andrew broke the silence with his abrupt

Meanwhile Nesvítski, Zherkóv, and the officer of the suite were
at Pierre kindly, with a fixed smile. The third lay prone so that his

the bridge.
“You have known Bezúkhov a long time?” he asked. “Do you like
    CHAPTER VIII
woman, clutching at her neck, screamed piercingly.
exercises in the music room. He knew that she had not sung since her

“Where are you off to?” he said suddenly to Prince Andrew who had
bad. But Anatole was dumb, swung his foot, and smilingly examined the
in a tone only used by persons who are certain that those they call will

attitude toward him that had taken place in society.
Instead of serried rows of bees sealing up every gap in the combs and
and in Russia—and that the movements from the west to the east and from
CHAPTER X

the flooding waters glittering in the setting sun.

again, and the little princess curiously noting the impression
yesterday’s ball, and asked when he was leaving. Though Borís had
stop.
“In a moment. À propos,” she added, becoming calm again, “I am
her fault that her face happened to assume an expression of calm dignity
At that moment a maid sent by the countess, who had noticed her
before leaving, Prince Andrew went to his son’s rooms. The boy,
Russian position—at the Shevárdino Redoubt—and unexpectedly for the


of that crowd terrible screams arose. Pétya galloped up, and the
reprehensible, looked round with a blush. It seemed to him that everyone
Through the first door came the sound of voices conversing in German
Natásha trained the family to get used to him, proudly assuring them
“Well, have it so, and you talked a lot of nonsense to him and must



“Why should you be God knows where out of sight, during the battle?” he
evening was this:
Zherkóv, not removing his hand from his cap, turned his horse about
“Give them that corn if there is enough of it. Distribute it all. I
ground, artillery and troops in blue uniform were seen. These were the
Dron paused. He looked askance at Princess Mary and said: “There are no
“Oh yes, I heard it today,” said Shinshín, coming into the
French as la grande redoute, la fatale redoute, la redoute du centre,
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
annoyance, folded them across his stomach, repeating the words: “For our
“Do you think he can last till morning?” asked the German,
passionately in love, left at the beginning of January to rejoin his
elbows on the table, thinking always of the same terrible question:
man she wished to attract.
princess suddenly, her pretty face all at once distorted by a tearful
hypothesis unconfirmed by the experience of history.

dismal appearance with its broken roofs and fences, its foul streets,
The courier who had been sent on in advance to find out where the

Bourienne was often touched to tears as in imagination she told this
had spent even more on his, but that the best thing about Bezúkhov’s
fashion.... And what have you to do yourself?” she asked the count
others.”
others. “Well, you old sinner,” she went on, turning to the count
asleep. Prince Andrew felt sorry for his sister.
really good society” consisted of the fascinating Hélène, forsaken
“From the direction, it must be the enemy,” repeated Rostóv.

“Lift it two lines more and it will be just right,” cried he in a
was immediately killed. Prince Andrew again seized the standard and,
Nicholas started angrily.
man... Simplicity is submission to God. Suffering is necessary... the
Next day the troops assembled in their appointed places in the evening
It would have been senseless, first because Napoleon’s disorganized
of the battle and had now caused him to run away from his home and, in
and that he was in everybody’s way. He really was in their way, for he
     course one cannot take into account the loss of private
the baron.
resolution just arrived at.
that’s it.” And with a complacent sigh he would return to the
had gone out somewhere and with whom he wanted a talk.

evening. There was room enough in the wide corridor for the generals to
though undone is but one,’ as the proverb says, but with thirteen in

buffoon,” as Perónskaya had called him, and knew he was looking for
that the French officer’s head had been torn off, so swiftly had he
Count Tolstóy, who had ridden out to the battlefield with others in

was obviously drunk. On seeing Pierre he grew confused at first, but
shoulder, and said that he was very grateful, but that it was impossible
saber, he sank on the snow beside it. His left hand was bloody; he wiped



and which is supposed to preclude human frailty, Pierre like the others
his appearance in Moscow, and of course in the Karágins’ drawing

“I don’t want to sleep, Mary, sit by me a little.”
quite astonishing. How did you get things settled? I couldn’t possibly
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he

would be something unnatural, and as it seemed to him dishonorable, in




    CHAPTER XXIX
back of their necks. In the midst of the outspread line of Cossacks two
opponent”) “with the gentleman... whom I have not the honor of knowing,
Then, vexed at his own weakness, he turned away and began to report
It was late in the evening when they entered the palace at Olmütz
What would Sónya have done without the glad consciousness that she had
that was his quick temper together with his old hussar habit of making
quits... it can’t be!... And why is he doing this to me?” Rostóv
seemed to be filled! And it is all so simple, pale, and crude in the
anything wrong in my behavior. But I’ll just tell Mamma how you are

The count, laughing, nudged the blushing Sónya and pointed to her

Pierre had met in Petersburg society. In the President’s chair sat a


nose. His face was depressed and gloomy. He seemed to see and hear
She hesitated for an instant whether to speak or not.
with a shy smile or, politely making way for the soldiers, paced up
no single quiver in Pierre’s voice, no look, no twitch of a muscle in
Dólokhov might have as many more, but the disparity of numbers did not
Consider, Prince Andrew. Two... Frederick and Suvórov; Moreau!...
war the most deeply considered plans have no significance and that all
done after Austerlitz, he related this occurrence at such length and
    CHAPTER I
a hot temper and said such and such things; we learn that Rousseau was
them.
“I can’t stand this any more,” said Ilyín, noticing that Rostóv did not
had changed greatly during that period. In the expression of his face,

and the glory that awaited him.
the clavichord, sang the tune. Bolkónski was not there. None of these
consulting his sergeant major, Zakharchénko, for whom he had great
were reporting. By long years of military experience he knew, and with
you will start. Send by special messenger to Usvyázh.”
because Moscow, the capital, was no more and only the army remained.
seeming to grow suddenly smaller, and respectfully received the blessing
like a horse running downhill harnessed to a heavy cart. Whether he was
when she stooped near to his mouth to catch what he said.
will to inevitability, that is, of consciousness to the laws of reason.
ball in 1810, with her slender neck and arms and with a frightened happy
experienced and capable in state affairs, who, without sharing any of
must attend to his son’s education by finding a tutor and putting

dress, girdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast.

more than anything in the world. What the result must be was quite
“Platoche! Eh, Platoche! Keep them yourself!” And handing back the odd


rascality....”
felt by every man, is understood by us only to the extent to which we
Then, noticing that Denísov was asleep, he rose and went out of doors.
Alexéevich, brandishing the pistol. “Board them!”
In the middle of the day Murat sent his adjutant to Napoleon to demand
commit murder he had restored it to the rightful king, I should have
he was doubly to blame, and he would have preferred to wait; but one of
threes, and reckoning them off on his fingers. Mentally addressing the
“He knows all about it,” said Márya Dmítrievna pointing to Pierre and

the nurse, as she stood in one of the doorways.
his fever and particularly lively. When Pierre reached the fire and
the ten-year preparatory period this man had formed relations with all

convincing.

Hippolyte “—so dull—. It has been a delightful evening, has it

always a right way of doing things,” replied the governor’s wife.


began pressing it to different parts of his breast as if trying to find
cannon and the crowd were dragging it out. A cannon ball killed someone
that moment his home life, jokes with Pétya, talks with Sónya, duets
There was nothing in Pierre’s soul now at all like what had troubled it
church. “That’s where one crosses the Kolochá. You see down there where


But before the words were well out of his mouth, his cap flew off and a
“Hey, Cossack, my horse!” he said. “Now, then, you there! get out
and regarded as the key to the position. He saw over the mist that in
and the others who did not approve of the plan of attack, were
man’s hand and moving her lips as if to send it a kiss. Pierre,
returning from the advanced detachment, rode up to Murat and reported
what is it I am attached to, Papa?” said Anatole, turning to his
“Where you are, there is vice and evil!” said Pierre to his wife.
her. “Do please just leave me alone!” And she ran out of the room, with
when they played some tricks on a policeman, didn’t they do it


way her brother had taken the news of Natásha’s faithlessness.
respectfully when the Military Governor, having stayed about half an
Some historians—those biographical and specialist historians already
She woke late. That sincerity which often comes with waking showed her
thoughts that had first come to him as he lay gazing at the sky on the
marrying a maiden had its effect on him too. Had Hélène herself shown
into a reverie without finishing the story. He thought not of this
But she remembered too how he had changed of late toward Mademoiselle

chirped from across the passage; someone was shouting and singing in
bewitching smiles: “But I think that having espoused the true religion I

wood from the prince, had begun to trade, and now had a house, an

condition is the will of the people delegated to one person? On


insignificance before him. The King of Prussia sends his wife to seek
in proportion to the present forces. The soldiers, who are worn out with
mounted dragoons.
another, hardly able to suppress their laughter.
Kutúzov had a whip slung across his shoulder.
received.
twenty to thirty rubles received for the most part in promises from a
“But what is there to say about me?” said Pierre, his face relaxing

his eyes every minutest detail of his last meeting with the object of
When on the twenty-first of October his general expressed a wish to send
father’s requirements better than you could, then it’s all right to let

prisoners. From all sides came shouts of command, and from the left came
why he should be disturbed by the bad composition of the Note.
“Come to your Papa at once, please!” said she with a strange, excited
take turns in order of seniority to receive one’s tumbler from Mary


as the guest of honor, to enter first. Bagratión was embarrassed, not


Narrow and burdensome and useless to anyone as his life now seemed to
water.
Prince Andrew shouted, “Brothers! All’s lost!” And at this as if
“They are talking about us, about me and him!” thought Natásha.
Emperor could not answer such a question. The troops are moved
did not, and could not, understand the meaning of words apart from
folk used to say: ‘A sweating hand’s an open hand, a dry hand’s close.’

Mikháylovich Volkónski and Baron Stein, and the door closed behind them.
“Yes, yes, of course!” Pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival of
not bear the idea of letting the enemy even reach Smolénsk, still less
labors, hoping to drive away the evil spirit that threatened him. Toward
Dron only sighed in reply.
fragrance of flowers. A beekeeper, seeing the bee collect pollen from
indestructible.
man is here and his son’s expected any day. You’ll have to make his
“Well, perhaps,” said he with a sigh. “We don’t expect to get him home
will be done; but if I am myself the cause, teach me what I should do! I
his volition. But his will—which forms the essence of his life—man

comforts of life. Others consisted solely of Cossack cavalry. There were
hinder you,” she said to herself, and sinking into a chair she let her
him before, they had been the result of his own wrongdoing, and at the
ridiculous, and she moved on almost fainting from excitement and trying
glad!”
would be killed.

“Later... later! Tomorrow. It’s too late...”

don’t know how to hide what I feel.” As he spoke he kept glancing
Anna Pávlovna continued to give on free evenings the same kind of


worthy of Nicholas whom she loved more than anything in the world. But
“Youth is no hindrance to courage,” muttered Sukhtélen in a failing
which was offered him. Telyánin for some reason had been transferred
The men remained at table over their port—English fashion. In the
he, evidently sincerely satisfied with his success. “Only, please be
“And mine have had nothing for two weeks,” said Denísov.


laughing eyes. “These Germans are first-rate fools, don’t you think so,

“What a nice figure the policeman must have cut, my dear!” shouted

serve a second term appears as much a cause as Napoleon’s refusal to
is a very shrewd and garrulous fellow.”
He had no plan, he was afraid of everything, but the parties snatched at



From beyond the town firing had been heard since early morning. At eight

She had a fan in her hand that one of the ladies had given her to hold.
departments.
The more this field of motion spreads out before our eyes, the more
whipped. “As soon as Napoleon’s interpreter had spoken,” says Thiers,
begin, when did it all come about?” And here he was sitting by her
Bolkónski recognized Prince Repnín whom he had met in Petersburg
conscious of the movement of his lips and the snuffling of his little

military men, bore that expression of condescending respect for their
always had lady companions, but who they were and what they were like
The officers, as usual, lived in twos and threes in the roofless,
existed, and when little Nicholas perceived him he grew faint with love:
made a half turn and went past it at a measured pace. The twenty-four
“Are you living with your mother?”
round hat, he wandered about the town, staring at the French and their

Merry senseless words of abuse flowed freely.
the excitement shown in some of these faces lay chiefly in questions
of deference also disturbed Pierre. He had suffered so painfully three
He was evidently so busy that he even forgot to be polite to the
water that had trickled to their bodies and not admit the fresh cold
connection that existed between himself and this man who was dimly
raisins, fine ones; you know, seedless ones. We have a new sutler and
of author.
“A bear, lads,” said one of the men.
Countess Mary looked round, saw little Andrew following her, felt that
And everything annoyed her—Denísov’s shouting and laughter, Natásha’s


The peasants say that a cold wind blows in late spring because the oaks
“Now just listen, Drónushka,” said he. “Don’t talk nonsense to me. His

Old Michael was asleep on the chest. Prokófy, the footman, who was
peasant, or a woman with a baby, has no rest day or night and I give

of chief of the Emperor’s staff. He came out of the study into the
Bilíbin’s letter which was written in French. He read without


regret at being prevented from taking part in the coming battle, but

you that it would be very easy to do so if you haven’t sufficient


anticipate her wishes, should become almost desperate when she brought
a feeling of horror at renouncing the possibility of real love still
“You see,” said Berg to his comrade, whom he called “friend”
regiment and was able to find pleasure in that life.
hearing him!” said the old prince, keeping hold of the hand and


“A child?” shouted a Frenchman from above. “I did hear something
A minute later the old man’s large stout figure in full-dress uniform,
was diverted by the desperate shrieks of the woman in the vehicle. An

dancer, and one of the best matches in the city.
of this kind for another, which from pride he would never accept for
aside the conception of cause, should seek the laws common to all the

Wonder-Worker on his breast, and his way of speaking and everything he

For instance, Pierre’s return was a joyful and important event and they
A soldier was driving, and a woman enveloped in shawls sat behind the
knowledge that all bodies have weight, up to Newton’s law), so too the
the universal historians and historians of culture themselves, for they


Princess Mary—reluctantly as is usual in such cases—began telling of


fastened it to the uniform. Lázarev glanced morosely at the little
theirs. We do not grudge them anything. Tell them so.”


alone foresaw, was his heart’s one desire.
Sokólniki.
happened to touch. Mademoiselle Bourienne stood near them pressing her
“No, on my true word of honor,” said Natásha, crossing herself,
its first eleven days after leaving Moscow: a stampede which made

country that summer of 1812.
constantly interrupted her story to say: “No, I can’t! I’m not telling
erect on his handsome black horse, looking about him in a leisurely and

“Papa, what are you doing that for?” asked Natásha, who had followed him
without taking any notice of him although they were now meeting for the

this uncertainty and hurry... There—they are shouting again, and
a vague consciousness that she was not Bonaparte’s servant, was really,
calamitous condition was the sending of Lauriston to Kutúzov’s camp with
rumors were current in the town. Some said that no one was to be allowed
    * Without faith or law.
meekly downcast eyes.
overhear them. The commander in chief listened to what was being said
Dmítrievna.
moment he entered. She did not smile or nod, but only gazed fixedly at
ready, but Pierre learned that it was being constructed by the Emperor’s
“What is the matter, Count?” asked the countess in a surprised and
him a message,” said the count. “Oh dear! Oh dear! How happy it all
edge of the forest.
the Shevárdino mound to observe the enemy. On the twenty-fourth, we

CHAPTER VII
him her intention of keeping him under her wing, Pétya guessed her
in chief, and from the noisy laughter of the Cossacks holding the
“This cold is tiresome. They talk about medicine—what is the good of
Over the whole field, previously so gaily beautiful with the glitter of

martial swagger in their clothes, and a touch of the gaiety and spirit
When Pierre went up to them he noticed that Véra was being carried away
coming. He is very good to me. We shall have supper, Count. So you will
“I shall scarcely be able to avail myself of your hospitality,


two.”
delicate as a child’s, revealed by the turn-down collar of his shirt,

the Russians and the French looked at Pierre with surprise. Besides his
with a scarf over his uniform and mounted on a lean, dark-gray horse,

an angry buzzing can sometimes be heard. Here and there a couple of
guided only by their private interests, and they were the very people
carriages, and carpets from the Polish proprietors. Rostóv remembered
opened it and took a pinch. “Back!” cried Simon to a borzoi that
He seemed in his heart to reproach her for being too perfect, and
again recalled all the details of the victory and his own calm courage
for an instant of the chase. The hare they had started was a strong and
to what the speaker was saying. The retired naval man was speaking very
The princess let go.
“I can’t think what the servants are about,” said the countess, turning
“Too hot!” she replied, blushing with pleasure.
to above the elbow, lay on the velvet edge of the box, while, evidently
But noticing the grieved expression on Princess Mary’s face she guessed
peace with you. As for the Swedes—it is their fate to be governed by
died down of itself just as it had sprung up, without apparent reason.
had learned to see the great, eternal, and infinite in everything, and
them you want—three if you like.”

“It is very good of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit a poor

room.
him to move to Moscow.

the food in the cauldron, and he thought it more delicious than any food


around. The flames flared up again, lighting the animated, delighted,
“Never mind! You’re young folks yet, and please God may still have some.

“All right, immediately,” he replied to a dresser who pointed Prince

held the army together. The Russians, on the contrary, ought according
after a short deliberation they agreed to advise his appointment as
being bombarded by a hundred and thirty guns which Napoleon had ordered
commanders. And then that happy moment, that Toulon for which he had
“‘You see, St. Thomas,’ he said to me the other day. ‘Monsieur Kiril is
advice is to let the matter drop. Well then, on Friday after the review
the interactions of Chateaubriand, Talleyrand, Madame de Staël, and the


Bolkónski in order to arrange a match for him with the daughter of that
was suddenly shown up in unexpected and striking beauty. For the first
numbers, he was again allotted his old squadron.
like diamonds and dappled with bluish shadows. Bang, bang! went the
all that he only appeared to be different, but was really just like all


understand him. At length when he had understood and looked in the
it dashed, some forward and some back, drowning one another.
the ground all night, had he beaten her or made her fetch wood or water,
was doing for his serfs, he would be vexed and reply: “Not in the least;
back to the house.

so strange that one could not take it in. But then the expression of
how he had that day seen Kutúzov, the newly chosen chief of the
its beard growing in uneven tufts. His black, agate pupils with
of the room. Prince Andrew turned to him, but the doctor gave him a
private vehicles.
gentlemen of the diplomatic corps. With Prince Hippolyte Kurágin,
attachments? Could she, like other women” (Véra meant herself),
this aim, we occupy ourselves either with the mystery which in our


Napoleon enters Moscow after the brilliant victory de la Moskowa; there
at the dog who was pretending to be in earnest about biting him,

The Mason looked intently at Pierre and smiled as a rich man with
Dólokhov remarked that the Cossacks were a danger only to stragglers
everything earthly and a strange and joyous lightness of existence.

with his eyes bandaged seemed to him an hour. His arms felt numb,
taken and I hope it will not be, for it is mined and orders have been
Andrew?’ I did indeed.” She laughed. “He is so well received
woman; and what have you done? You have not helped her to find the way
whose hands lay the real power—the soldiers who fired, or transported
To understand in what this dependence consists it is necessary to
positions and withdrawn in his presence. Together with Túshin, stepping
of past and future hunts, of Rugáy and Ilágin’s dogs, while Natásha
lifted her high, placed her on his shoulder, held her by the legs, and

amid the smoke of their campfires, the greater part of whom were
At six in the evening, Kutúzov went to the Emperor’s headquarters

“Papa,” said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before,
anything on the way, his intention could not now have been carried out,
own. When she did not understand, it was sweeter still to think that
up to her daughter and touched her head with the back of her hand as she
The count frowned.
Dólokhov looked at Pierre with clear, mirthful, cruel eyes, and that
“He’s arrived!”
his work. Only a couple of times a year—when he knew from their valets

whole month, or go on falling and never reach the bottom. Perhaps it

The count wished to go home, but Hélène entreated him not to spoil her
Berg always spoke quietly, politely, and with great precision. His

et énergique, he himself was still the same: he knew that and knew that
dozen of the serf mummers and drive to “Uncle’s.”
Berg smiled with a sense of his superiority over a weak woman, and
occasions—that he loved her and had never loved any other woman more
You’d better listen more carefully!”
simply enjoyed their pleasure and tried to fit in with it.
a headache began to say good night.
the army, were dissatisfied with the peace concluded after the battle of
mature and culminate, to lift him out of that spellbound, petty sphere
few days and which was essential for the execution of his design. The
mission; the abundance of provisions at Tarútino; the reports coming in
inquired.
Prince Dolgorúkov to the advanced post of the French army.

what I have seen during these last three months is incredible.
“But I am three times as rich as before,” returned Pierre.

tell his comrades something very important.
and wheels began to revolve faster and faster, levers and cogwheels to
Karatáev. Would he have approved of you now, do you think?”
now turned on Moscow, the army, and Napoleon.

“To search far...” repeated the count, evidently sorry Simon had not
After the second day’s march Pierre, having examined his feet by the
whatever.
decision would be to risk exposing one’s stupidity and incapacity to
to him of the effect those batteries produced.
that they may run smoothly.
she feel able to think clearly and calmly of Prince Andrew and Anatole,
He went in silence from one corner of the room to the other and again
day he had learned that Prince Andrew, after surviving the battle of
know his age and was quite unable to determine it. But his brilliantly
strange chance no one perceives this. His part is not yet ended. The man
“But how? Are we to take him up to her? The room there has not been
to retire from the army and return and marry Sónya, Nicholas, serious,
“We kicked him out from there so that he chucked everything, we grabbed
things the old count sent to his son.
“Ah, those are the French! And over there?...” Pierre pointed to a knoll

putting it up.
were a few dozen miles separating it from its goal. Every soldier in

Alpátych clung to Prince Andrew’s leg and burst into sobs. Gently
was lost. No one whom Rostóv asked could tell him where the Emperor
may—then out of all the continually expressed wishes of different people
hurry to get where he was not.
Mademoiselle Bourienne was the first to recover herself after this
a whole month and this is the first time I have seen him in society.
to have any children by me.”
“Yes, I never loved her,” said he to himself; “I knew she was a
up tomorrow. But you will see everything for yourself when you get to
with closed eyes, heaving abrupt sighs at certain passages.
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this

Two steps from him, leaning against a branch and talking loudly and
that he asked his opinion, Pfuel rose and, suddenly growing animated,
leader, called les nôtres. * This set, consisting almost exclusively of

“To hand in a letter, a petition, to His Majesty,” said Nicholas,
intercourse with young women.

“Look sharp! Look sharp!” several voices repeated around him.
abandoned the attempt to find the cause in the will of some one man,
“You, my little countess, are a notorious spendthrift,” said the
edge. The Cossack was sharpening the saber under the wagon.



Pierre did not find his groom and rode along the hollow with the
fulfill the desires of Your Majesty.”
away and not leave them with the enemy, and there is an order from the
a man oppressed by business, weary and suffering, who yet would not, for
of sound, white teeth.
certainly is communicated very surely, and flows rapidly, imperceptibly,
Hélène.”
at his hesitation and, trying to arouse his former devotional feeling,




The day was clear and frosty. Kutúzov rode to Dóbroe on his plump little
gnashing her teeth, flew at the yellowish borzoi, which, with a piercing
depressed. Without greeting the officers, he scratched himself and asked
useless and harmful.
down the room for a long time, no longer piercing an imaginary foe with
in time and himself takes part in what occurs.
him. She refused to go away and her father’s fury broke over her in a
“What a splendid reign the Emperor Alexander’s might have been!”
“But if for any reason you don’t feel inclined to talk to me,”
field of Austerlitz. Not only does a good army commander not need any
CHAPTER XIV
plants grow from seeds producing two cotyledons, should insist that all
especially on returning to the old conditions of life amid which he had
gentlemen-in-waiting he had formerly despised: they were empty, stupid,

when the subject did not relate to himself, but in connection with the

has gone too deep in his heart for him ever to decide to give her a

pet of a trader,’” said the adjutant smiling. “They asked him, ‘Who gave
“And I don’t at all want to get married. And I am afraid of him; I
And the count stepped as briskly back into the room and slammed the door
“They must understand that we can only lose by taking the offensive.

with the lassitude of age, sat yawning wearily with closed eyes. The
two friends, one of whom was a dashing hussar and the other a notorious
at which Prince Andrew had been when he examined the battlefield.


of international relations, conquests, and alliances, the historians are
in the baggage train he had passed that morning on the Znaim road seven
near the gun waved their arms and beat the horses to make them turn and
might find in the Russian Empire by sticking a pin into the map at
essentially as before.
existence of Prussia.
countess in, while maids rushed with cushions and bundles from the house
The countess and Sónya cried from pity for Natásha and because he was
Sophie, the rosy, laughter-loving, youngest princess with the mole,
evidently impossible.
cavalry saddle, with a merry, and tipsy face. Napoleon told him to ride
Her brother often wondered as he looked at her. She did not seem at

soldiers, straining their lungs, shouted “Hurrah!”
“Your honor, the generals!” said the sergeant, riding up to Rostóv.
have been more surprised than Mademoiselle Bourienne at the change that
have been sent him from here, and his Serene Highness says he will
holding in her hands the old ball dress (already out of fashion) which
for fuel and kindled fires there.
with her and avail themselves of her suppers, soirees, and the animated
the seat indicated to him beside the fair Hélène and listened to the

Of a fourth opinion the most conspicuous representative was the
him with particular warmth and the Emperor, with his head bent to the
did she not show any trace of coquetry, but on the contrary she even
evening light and the blue tunics advancing from the other side with
plan for that evening. Sónya knocked at her door. Natásha did not let
days of her own girlhood and her own first ball. The host also followed
which with the masses needs explanation. It is possible to understand
Bagratión ordered two battalions from the center to be sent to
evidently weakened, was undertaking nothing.
to be grew stronger, and he meekly followed Anna Mikháylovna who was
In spite of the many pills she swallowed and the drops and powders out
For a moment the crowd stood still, but then it made another rush
the second week.
richest of the officers now that he had received his money, bought it.
threescore and six.

presence they would have had to answer inopportune questions and to
rest. Life in the regiment, during this campaign, was all the pleasanter
to the factor does not yield results which accord with the historic


“And I was wishing for his death!” thought Princess Mary.
their long hair falling over their magnificent glittering vestments,
at the old man with moist, shining, and ecstatic eyes, “I say, do you
child in a toyshop, did not know which way to look, afraid of missing
Kutúzov was silent for a few seconds and then, submitting with evident
“Vasíli Dmítrich, I’m so sorry for you!... No, but you are so
“Get well soon, lads!” he continued, turning to the soldiers.
before him a Frenchman hitting a peasant with a blunt saber and trying
naughty...”
This letter was brought to Pierre’s house when he was on the field of
very next morning after the battle, the French army advanced of itself
way,” he added in Russian—but pronouncing the word with a French
all make out: was it a glade in the wood lit up by the moon, or some
“There... he’s puffing again,” muttered Túshin to himself, as a
self-complacency than his did.) “Well, he stormed at me, as the saying


triangles are equal; please note that the angle ABC...”
to answer to our offended country for the loss of Moscow. You have
name, Nastásya Ivánovna.
Pierre to translate what he said.

“Yes, I know him....”
The commander of the militia was a civilian general, an old man who was
irregular and feeble in comparison with the reports of the cannon.
they had when she was not thinking of herself. As with everyone, her
Princess Mary did not listen to the end, but continuing her train of
of temples and supplemented as far as he could the collection of alms,
Natásha looked at the fat actress, but neither saw nor heard nor
not accepted as a great man, still less as Emperor of France. And my
with apparent relief, and began walking up and down, arm in arm, to
that’s not what is needed now.
or anywhere else, neither Barclay nor the Emperor, neither Pfuel nor
power and therefore to have the possibility of bringing about the
the whole herd is constantly altered, this is because in order to follow
activity of the millions who migrate, burn houses, abandon agriculture,
In the corner room at the Club, members gathered to read these
the French assumed a still more tragic character, with men freezing,
people who formed part of that municipality and under pretext of
    CHAPTER XVI
vain. She did not at all realize that before having seen her future
pipes, make campfires of the Senate chairs in the Senate Square, and

“Come in, Mary,” he said to his wife.
dressed gay young men on splendid, well-groomed, fresh, only slightly

“Well, there you see!”

a strange caprice of his employer’s was admitted to table though the

that state of mind which makes everything seem possible, pleasant, and
we can assist our Fatherland! I imagine,” he went on, warming to his
So the countess remained in the country, and the count, taking Sónya
might outweigh all the courage of the Russian troops, and at the same
of his life, but he knew that this feeling which he did not know how to
to whom Denísov had had some mutton and vodka given, and whom he had had
Across the paper was scrawled in pencil, without capital letters,
them. The dragoons were now close at hand. On seeing the hussars, the
hurrying along by the fence, he turned several times to look at her.
horse fancier, a sportsman, the possessor of some century-old brandy
“Not a bit! Please don’t, Aunt!”
noticing that Pierre was listening, suddenly said to him:

downwards as was his habit.
when he makes his round, he will do anything for you.”
was perfectly true. He was afraid of getting some other officer into
it were, hardened by a varnish left by the thousands of looks that had
After a few words about Princess Mary and her late father, whom
some carriages waiting, and as soon as Pierre stepped out of the gate
Tróitsa.
incomparably higher than a general, and according to which what was
irresistible human need for sleep. He really was asleep. Weyrother, with
which creaked under his weight.
reinforcements when they already have half the army directed against a
the boyars had already taken definite shape in his imagination. That
Krásnoe and the Berëzina he deprived the Russian army of the glory of
“Take a stick between your legs, that’ll suit you for a horse!”

“All right, all right,” interrupted the prince, and laughing his

jabbering! Fine, isn’t it? It’s all the Frenchy can do to keep up
and Dólokhov went along the pavement. When they reached the gate
but had to shield his mother from knowledge of their poverty. The
removed, this was only done on the demand of officials to whom the count
added.
at Prince Andrew and did not even nod to him.

often than at anyone else and took delight in his every movement.
that time paid no attention to the general progress of events but were

While imprisoned in the shed Pierre had learned not with his intellect
The battle of Tarútino obviously did not attain the aim Toll had in
behind each chair—stood waiting for the prince to enter. The head
put her hand gaily on the man’s shoulder, smiling at Prince Andrew.
abroad, the other is with the Guards, who are starting on their march
copse. He knew that young and old wolves were there, that the hounds had
rightly supposes that matters have already gone too far. I think it will
gentleman of the chamber, presented himself at court and at a levee. The
    CHAPTER IX
room, exclaiming and oh-ing and ah-ing.

their orders, like Napoleon’s, were seldom carried out, and then but
them—remained for a while without any definite opinion on the subject

duty. The Emperor is gracious, and I shan’t forget you if you deserve
study, the old prince went for his walk as usual next morning, but he

yet killed. The regiment stood in columns of battalion, three hundred
arrival of many wealthy families from Moscow, and as in everything that
with quick steps, accompanied by Michael Ivánovich, bringing the letter
understand for a long time, till at last Tíkhon understood and repeated
being wrong.

In the fresh morning air were now heard, not two or three musket shots
with gossip,” he continued. “Just now they are talking about you and
And again she began to sob, more bitterly than before. Natásha lifted
opened his eyes and saw the same penthouse roofs, posts, and yard, but
this extraordinary gathering not only of nobles but also of the

the thought that little Nicholas would be left without a father. With
of disarmed Frenchmen pass by. The French, excited by all that had
“Bravo! Ha, ha, ha!” rose their rough, joyous laughter from all sides.
Meantime, according to the dispositions which said that “the First
the sight of the grandeur and glory with which he has covered France.
They were sitting in the twilight by a window in the drawing room.
of the third company!”
to the boy. He grew silent, and quiet ensued for a moment, terrible to
remains.
recognized his strength and their own weakness, and frankly said so.
smile.
“Oh goodness! What has happened? Really it was not my fault!”
that he may marry tomorrow if he likes. She will be little Nicholas’

He looked with disdain at the endless confused mass of detachments,


resolute self-will, “he is wicked and heartless. There now, I like
appreciated the other’s capacity or because he considered it necessary
There was a special reason for this, as he had got married two years
bridge leading to the village, not more than five hundred yards
greater reasons.”
PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND

frequently. A general does nothing but command the troops, indicates the
vicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess. In the first moment of
suddenly there was a ringing in his ears, a dimness in his eyes, and
their places, and one of them read an exhortation on the necessity of
she could not get on without medical treatment, so they kept her in the
absorbed the greater part of his vital energy. He did nothing, did
But repressed vexation at his son’s poor-spirited behavior found
where cattle were grazing, posthouses with stationmasters asleep in
an example to other Russians, went to Moscow thinking only of their own

heard the words as he might have heard the buzzing of a fly. Not only

Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full

Modern history, in theory, rejects both these principles.
to give full play to her feeling for her brother. That feeling was so
down beside the sofa.
and not only at the same hour but at the same minute. With those about

swallowing his r’s and generally slurring his consonants: the voice of
Bilíbin, who had not lost his reputation of an exceedingly clever man,
to be observed by their companions and searching uneasily for rivals to
know, Prince Andrew’s letter! Princess Mary read it. Dessalles said
Theodosia, who for over thirty years had gone about barefoot and worn
And from the different ranks some twenty men ran to the front. A
kind sprang from a second door and a third; more hugging, more kissing,
great redoubt held out well, by my pipe!” continued the Frenchman. “And
affairs reluctantly, left everything to his generals, and while awaiting
Blood was gushing from its leg as from a spring. Among the limbers lay
“Well, what does that lead up to?” said Nicholas.
to Count T., Prince V., and others. Then he bursts into one of his wild
Emperor was invited to act as hostess. Count Bennigsen, being a
“Cependant, mon cher,” he remarked, examining his nails from a
Count Rostóv took the girls to Countess Bezúkhova’s. There were
lose anything...” Dólokhov was saying.
But these words came like a piteous, despairing cry and an entreaty for
Bezúkhov’s household, despite all the search they made, saw Pierre again
your enchanting party,” said he, turning to Anna Pávlovna.
During this halt the escort treated the prisoners even worse than they




and tear whatever came to his hand. “Why did I tell her that ‘Je
glancing at those near him and at the troops who were approaching and
pondered a little in silence and then indicated the spots where two
feeling of sickening agitation.
affairs, into which we had been drawn by the Peace of Tilsit. “We
of a sin he could neither remedy nor forget. He could not weep. The

it was from. Probably she is offended by it. She could not do such a
to speak openly; and to him he told all that was in his soul. Now he
chief.
in the fable she was to pine apart from me.... But it was much simpler
hair, who was surrounded by ladies laughing at something he said.
officers.

was doing; the boldness with which our outposts now scouted close up to
looked as clean and well washed as the tips of one’s fingers after a
raised her tail and stiffened her forelegs.
stimulating effect on him. “Vive l’Empereur! l’Empereur!” he now

Rostóv shrugged his shoulders as much as to say: “Nor do I, but

new pack of cards said: “Bank, gentlemen!”
In the porch and in the yard the men whom Pétya had armed with swords
all that would be required of him.

other lady visitors were farther down. At the other end sat the count,
force, and so on, but we are conscious of the force of life in man and
of his coat and looking down at him—the Englishman was short—began
reminiscences.
had suddenly turned into a low, solid vault that weighed him down, in
Count,” said Berg, lighting his pipe and emitting rings of smoke.
and sought the acquaintance of only those above him in position and

When Pierre remembered them afterwards they all seemed misty figures to

CHAPTER VII
I shall do. You don’t understand that. What can I do? What can I do,



down as a stone and raise me up as a loaf!” and every morning on getting
Bagratión appeared in the doorway of the anteroom without hat or sword,
behind him.
The better we are acquainted with the physiological, psychological, and
Formerly in Anna Pávlovna’s presence, Pierre had always felt that
something gripped her throat, and regardless of manners she stared


things that he has been expelled by the police.”

found out, nothing discovered,” Pierre again said to himself. “All
History seems to assume that this force is self-evident and known to
cardinal virtues in her gave her lessons in algebra and geometry
decided that day, but that they also knew what she thought about it. She

Pierre finished what he had begun. It was the sequel to his complacent
nearer and saw that the old man had only one leg bent under him, the
he even found cause for self-satisfaction in having so successfully
his prestige—do not appear upon the scene till he is no longer there.
glasses, and sat down.

“Yes, they are splendid, splendid youngsters,” chimed in the count,
the event seemed to depend) should be carried out, the concurrence of



    CHAPTER IX

Natásha continued: “Don’t you really understand? Nicholas would
and, having undone her pale-colored plait, was pulling it straight
Prince Andrew sighed and made no reply.
the left.
his announcement to the Rostóvs that he would remain in Moscow would all
Kutúzov as far as was in his power, instead of trying to check the
you: “He was in the great battle before Moscow!”
and wish you to have as good an opinion of me. Don’t upset yourself,
the action the less they can command and the more numerous they are,
honor, was terrible.
side as her betrothed, seeing, hearing, feeling her nearness, her


Russia’s glory were led to destruction. Go, Princess Mary. Go and tell
so they took my Vánka to be shaved for a soldier! But we all have to
“Is he weaker? Thinner?” asked the princess.
“Why? Did the Tugendbund which saved Europe” (they did not then venture
chief. “Be he what he may” (they always began like that), “he is an
himself, but was adored by everybody. “No, that’s impossible,” said he,
in spite of his youth wished to serve his country; that youth could be
traveler, having packed his things with his practiced hands, began
“Dear me, Michael Kirílovich has grown still stouter!” remarked the

“I imagine, sir,” said he, mumbling with his toothless mouth, “that we

house, now and then opening her door when someone passed and watching
horror-struck. But when she saw that Pierre’s sacrilegious words
appear evidently less free than a man’s entry into marriage today. It is
long-drawn, measured death rattle did the crowd around his prostrate,

At the end of January Princess Mary left for Moscow, and the count

circumstances, and his mother having at one time mentioned her to him as
brother who prepared a seeker for entrance into the Brotherhood was

“Fool! Idiot!” shouted Pierre, abusing his coachman—a thing he rarely
Hippolyte, and began looking through a lorgnette at his elevated legs.
“So what are your orders? Are you starting tomorrow?” asked Savélich.

Princess Mary told Pierre of her plan to become intimate with her future

    CHAPTER XXXVIII
glass, smiled, and walked toward the other door. Natásha was about to



“Yes, I feel a kind of oppression,” she said in reply to the
The valet sat up and whispered something. Timókhin, kept awake by the

only the capacity calmly to contemplate the course of events—the more



“Well, good-by, Prince,” said he to Bagratión. “My blessing, and

It was eleven by the clock, but it seemed peculiarly dark out of doors.

gay.
“But why are you angry?” remonstrated Tíkhon, “just as if I’d never seen
found it, I’ve found it!” he added.
everyone!
“And Bolkónski?” she asked.
The mother’s wounded spirit could not heal. Pétya’s death had torn from
but had begun the attack next morning, no one would have doubted that
army.... Go on... harder, harder!” he muttered, hunching his back and



“Very well, very well!” muttered the officer, threateningly, and
He implored Rostóv to go on and prepare her.
During Rostóv’s short stay in Moscow, before rejoining the army, he
His conversation with Count Rostopchín and the latter’s tone of anxious
“Well, and you, have you a family estate, sir? And a house? So you have
It would be too painful to me to think that I might be a cause of sorrow


branches of the service, who all looked with astonishment at his white
are executed.


to do it?”—“Because you married her,” answered an inner voice.
Alexéevich’s house and keeping his name secret. Then during the first
inconceivable without the physical, the cause of the event is neither in
take part in the conversations or express any opinion. After hearing

spreading out his legs and putting his hands on his knees with the air

battle had been deplorable. Napoleon made ironic remarks during

“Very likely it would be splendid, but it will never come about....”
Anna Pávlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand. She knew his
freshness, an unconsciousness of her own powers, and an as yet untrained

that happen?

as soon as the necessity for a general European war presented itself he

gloom, but a dark sea swelling and gradually subsiding after a storm.
the appointed place.
it completely, so that Alpátych could not pass out and had to wait.
but when close to the hare’s scut paused as if measuring the distance,
the doctor. He felt Prince Andrew’s pulse, and to his surprise and
The Russians retreated eighty miles—to beyond Moscow—and the French

to their companies, the sergeants major began bustling (the greatcoats


the Tsar with another glance at the Emperor Francis, as if inviting
“Yes, I’d send them on in front, but no fear, they’re crowding up



The officer, evidently glad of an opportunity for a talk, moved up to
A tall, stout, and proud-looking woman, with a round-faced smiling
table that he had pushed away. “But... in short, the fact is... you

about the old prince and criticized him.
forehead as he stooped to kiss her hand. She wished to love him as a
his head.

life one may discriminate between those in which substance prevails

They did not answer but began to laugh. Dimmler from the sleigh behind
all....” said he.
the wedding, but the count had not yet decided in his own mind the
line with the rest of the forces.
onlookers for what was to follow. As soon as the provocatively gay
came to me to ask for a few carts for the wounded. After all, ours are
world, whom no one knew of. It might really have been that the hussar
the wolf, but it vanished into the wood before they could do so.

“Now then, go away and take your monstrosity with you,” said the

of the French Emperor’s palace, arrived at Napoleon’s quarters at
she asked Natásha. “Here, hand some fruit jelly to the Turk!”
knitting, went to the window and leaning out tried to catch the open


with pale faces round the cook. The loudest sound in that crowd was her
hearing with pleasure the whistle of bullets evidently aimed at him.
rebukes from all sides addressed to the jesting soldier.
delirious. Prince Andrew’s bearers, stepping over the wounded who had
looking at those driving past as if he pitied all who were not at that
and jolly lad who shouts, ‘Hurrah!’—a detachment of five thousand
terrible and menacing. A cold shiver ran down his spine. He rose
are spying, treachery, and their encouragement, the ruin of a country’s
little, I mean a good deal, a great deal—forty three thousand.”
the genius—of Murat.
“Go, Tit! Thresh a bit!”
“Tit! I say, Tit!” said the groom.
paper. He looked gloomily in Rostóv’s face and said: “I am witing
without knowing why. “I really don’t know what sort of girl she is;
all there is the well-known conversation after the council, between the
into the avenue. A large crowd of militiamen and domestics were moving
“Have you been here long, Countess?” he inquired. “I’ll call,

letter from home and meet one of your own people whom you want to talk
its habitual calm and firm appearance.
next glanced round in alarm.
hard, and (in her own way) proud princess.
voices.
prepared the surprise, having placed something on the chairs and covered
not understand what he ought to do then it will be my affair—yes, my
realize because the fear was so much the stronger feeling. The prince
and they will at once perceive a unity and coherence in what happened
from the marshal. What marshal this was, Pierre could not learn from the
was at home last, and, having assured himself that they had not, he



In the disposition it is said first that the batteries placed on the
a strategist and the conqueror of Napoleon? Had he not seen the
blood rush to his heart and had again to get up and move about and break
cousin, evidently wishing to distract her mind.
CHAPTER VII
“The count—Count Ilyá Andréevich Rostóv.”

entrance of the house at Bald Hills. As they approached the house,

Alpátych turned his face to Prince Andrew, looked at him, and suddenly

joyfully up to Pierre. His face was so unusually triumphant that Pierre
just such a story—they would either not have believed him or, still
rode with our regiment all the time, so that we had every comfort and
reproachfully to the man who had spoken of frozen feet.


inquiringly at the French colonel. The colonel respectfully informed His
Pierre listened with swelling heart, gazing into the Mason’s face with
err, and in nothing more than in what they consider right and wrong.”
of the hosts, as many as a hundred visitors would gather there for a day
answered his own question: “You see I was told to find out—well, I am
at his coronation, and, waving his right arm, said:
another page I don’t understand at all,” said he to himself, and
CHAPTER V
wards, consisting of three rooms, the doors of which stood open. There
sweetly solemn hymn. Pétya was as musical as Natásha and more so than
prepared by him, had now been ruined by somebody, and that that somebody
now heard nothing else. On the right of the battery soldiers shouting
authority of the monarch.
“What about the left flank?” asked Pierre
Princess Mary ran out to the porch, down the flower-bordered path, and
give me satisfaction...”
“You are off to the war, Prince?” said Anna Pávlovna.
affairs, but a remote sympathy not dulled by petty interests; a moral
supplies were for the most part stored along the Oká in the Túla and
anger he did not condescend to notice, and said: “I think you were
childlike smile which had not once appeared on his face since he left
locked him up at night in a stable. Of all that he himself subsequently
Prince Andrew, in the white uniform of a cavalry colonel, wearing
did kindle in her handsome, fully developed body she was even more
the honor of this visit.

incessantly, repeating Petersburg reminiscences and even phrases. Prince
CHAPTER III

smacked his lips.
someone has wronged you, forget it and forgive! We have no right to

before, yet when under the same conditions and with the same character
“Yes, yes, there will be something to see....”

things and everybody would go into raptures over every word of hers
is transferred to the rulers conditionally, under definite and known

When that door was opened and the prisoners, crowding against one





room and began to say something in French. The Governor’s face expressed
historians say that power rests on a conditional delegation of the will

“He says he expected it,” she remarked. “I know his pride will not let
“But they told us Little Mytíshchi had been set on fire by Mamónov’s
do you know he has fallen in love with Sónya?”


patronage but stood on an equal footing with the highest of those of his
feat; and like a child he made sport of the momentous, and unavoidable


said he, “but the health of our Sovereign, that good, enchanting, and


Suddenly an electric shock seemed to run through Natásha’s whole being.
had stared with merry surprise at his hat (perhaps the very men he had
say. But Natásha was not satisfied with her own words: she felt that
table and becoming more animated and talking more rapidly: “what if
rising in his soul. Dólokhov, Denísov, and Rostóv were now sitting
face was not visible. The cavalry singers were passing close by:

He enlivened the whole party. The wax candles burned brightly, the

eyes. Princess Mary noticed this and glanced gratefully at him with that
hands—hands which were broad, but very plump, soft, and white. Such
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

knew that provisions were scarce there), but because this alone could
Taking the colonel’s outburst as a challenge to his courage, the
malevolent and caustic expression softened, as if admitting that what
flashed with a cruel light.
and Tíkhon a hero too, and that it would be shameful for him to leave
sergeant of Poniatowski’s corps, who explained in Polish that he had

lodge, was calmed by the thought that now their affairs would certainly
“What audacity! Hand it in through your commander. And go along with
seemed to have shriveled or melted; his features had grown smaller.


society so dearly and distinctly indicated.
drawing room, he served, by the contrast he presented to her, as an

The road was clear again; Pierre descended the hill and drove on.
difficulty from the thoughts that preoccupied him.
He did not finish his sentence, but his tone showed how highly he
joyful and mysterious taking place within her.
man, he felt uneasy. He looked round at the captive drummer boy and felt
The officer was Pétya Rostóv.
other half is everything where she is not, and there is all gloom and
express his opinion as he had hoped to, left on him a vague and uneasy
ears washed, perfumed, and powdered, as befits a ball; the openwork
for the first time vividly imagined what was in store for her there at

Bolkónski.

could get more rewards by doing nothing on the staff, and had succeeded
who nodded her head with a happy smile.
Beyond Shámshevo, Dólokhov was to observe the road in the same way, to

pleasure that for the first time since his arrival Prince Andrew was

went up to her and began singing, waving his arms about.
intention of demonstrating the advantages of his position and showing
Suddenly Pierre heaved a deep sigh and dumped his heavy person down on
of a man’s footstep, and then her face resumed its cold and malevolent
“It is an illness, there’s no other way of explaining it,” said
“The reserves, sire!” replied a voice, a very human one compared to
the hunters who were arriving. The presence of Natásha—a woman, a
blockhead!”
Afterwards when he recalled those thoughts Pierre was convinced that
“Princess, come here!” he shouted.
sign.

“Yes, Mamma, I will write,” said she.
in the relative strength, and an advance had become inevitable. And at
Andrew went out with him.
shrines, riches, or houses—it was still the Moscow it had been in
then all will be right, as our bear huntsman at Kostromá used to tell
foot when but a few minutes before she had been wishing she had more
and will soothe him better than a skilled man who is a stranger could.
father’s nature showed itself in Pierre. He felt the fascination and
authority. Rostopchín was so pleased with the fine role of leader of
that everything done by necessity, by accident, or by the will of

the prince. “And if you allow yourself,” he screamed in a fury,

by the tears that dimmed her velvety black eyes—she wrote that touching
against the worsening of their position they were all particularly
“No,” said Prince Andrew, “my father did not wish me to take
when with her—might “become womanish” as he termed it to himself—he
his slightest movement.
Pierre shook his head and went on. In another side street a sentinel

Vasíli, who had grown thinner and paler during the last few days,

turned to Berthier and said he wished to see how the news that he was
After the advance has begun in this manner, orders will be given in
the inquisitive man, and looked around him.
now considered everything possible.
The rain had stopped, and only the mist was falling and drops from

threatening the empire and of the hopes he placed on the Moscow
All that Pierre saw was so indefinite that neither the left nor the

Rostóv passed through the anteroom.
because other Russians, sitting in warm rooms, proposed that they should

Revelation of St. John.
strong at the moment of leaving Vorónezh that those who saw her off, as

expression the sculptor had happened to give the angel’s face, Prince
personal safety, and that the worst commander in chief, if independent,
that was enough. She exhaled happiness and love from the time Nicholas

he was proud to be at the head of such a nation and would endeavor to be


this event was accompanied by its justification in the necessity for a
“You had better go.”
hands which show the time, so the result of all the complicated human
There is no one in Russian literature now, from schoolboy essayist to
collapsing and again slowly rising to the sound of whispered rhythmic
three-ruble tip, and on arriving he ran breathlessly, like a boy, up the
out that when the cheaper things not worth taking had nearly all been

were and only asked them to allay his grief.
This was the count’s favorite dance, which he had danced in his youth.
preparation swept over all the troops.
understood what was happening as little as he did.
The Rostóvs’ monetary affairs had not improved during the two years
whistle and hiss of the flames, the excited shouts of the people, and
and felt that only in the regiment would everything again become clear
“May I go in and look?”
take advantage of her misfortunes to intrude upon her.

Russian. To the noncommissioned officer’s excuse that the prisoner was



paying off the debts and undertaking new activities with serf labor,


stopped and looked about him.
are false.
again to the house, she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne—who had remained
“Clear that away!” said the officer, pointing to the beams and the
defeated. A week after the gazette report of the battle of Austerlitz

There was running to and fro and whispering; another troyka flew

what are your commands?”

“And that son of a bitch Petróv has lagged behind after all, it seems,”

its inhabitants have left it and it is occupied by soldiers who smoke

“He’s dead—why carry him?” said another.
During the first weeks of his stay in Petersburg Prince Andrew felt the
And having entered on the path of definition, of which he was fond,
    * “He is all the rage just now.”
you? It will all pass, Natásha.”
placed them on the window sill, though it was already quite light.
triumphant, cheerful face.
A comely, fresh-looking old man was conducting the service with that
countess say. “Why are you sitting there like conspirators?”
turned toward the women, and while the vehicle was passing at foot pace
let him go.
shoulders close to his eyes.
like a man suffering from the quinsy, and, still slightly swaying
Barclay, who had gone away in dudgeon, had to be filled. Very serious
went up hurriedly to Natásha, took her by the hand, and said with a
gentlemen, messieurs les maréchaux, * Murat, Lannes, and Belliard,
that it would be a bad thing), but he knew it would happen.
seven in the morning but had not reached it by five in the afternoon.”
evil can there be in it if unfortunate people, our serfs, people like
self-indulgence!”
which he had reckoned up to ten thousand, but that now, as he vaguely
“I don’t at all say that all the plans are good,” said Prince
enjoyable. That year two marriages had come of these balls. The two

“I was very glad of his appointment, that’s all I know,” replied Prince
livid face stained with blood and dust.

championship of the doctor’s wife in her queer trap might expose him
activity of those men as representing the activity of the whole nation.
room, and Julie, suddenly abandoning her melancholy, became cheerful and
was in raptures about him, when he had just returned from abroad, and
with a stern and serious air which showed that now was no time for

lighthearted and happy in these novel surroundings that she only feared
the employment of power confer benefactions.
postmaster’s book. Bazdéev had been one of the best-known Freemasons
“You don’t know what love is....”

he might not be unworthy of the company in which he found himself.
laws defined by a pseudo-theory of war, and they saw only barbarism,
“I’ve come at a bad time I think. I should not have come, but I have

Still greater coherence and inevitability is seen in the life of
“I should think so!” he replied. “I have felt like that when

control them without their being aware of it. In a word, we must found a
Not only did his contemporaries, carried away by their passions, talk
unmelted snow, or some white houses? He even thought something moved on
smile, and engaged the smiling Julie in a confidential conversation
supplies the basis of the movement of all humanity, just as a similar

that gesture he meant to rebuke everybody, and, with an air of not

man. He was being conveyed in a calèche with a raised hood, and was
are now the children of earth are—eternally—children of the
Borís evidently said this to Pierre in order to be overheard by his
begun by the will of one man, Napoleon, that argument seems not merely
“Maybe I do love a poor girl,” said Nicholas to himself. “Am I to

father’s affairs in order, and would even—he felt it—ensure Princess
him die feeling that he is rendering unhappy those who...”
“Hur-a-a-a-ah!” came a roar of voices. “Let anyone come my way
Staff, the presence of confidential representatives of the Emperor, and
and ceased talking when Véra entered. Sónya and Natásha looked at
one side of the road. The cavalry regiment, as it descended the hill
“Bring it here—that’s fine!”
he added that Prince Vasíli was also there. When Tíkhon came to her
with a mildly contemptuous smile, as if intimating by that smile that he
    CHAPTER XII

Mary despite her plainness seemed to him more attractive than Julie, he,
Pierre went to the children, and the shouting and laughter grew still
on the vanity of all worldly things, and to them she showed her albums
on quietly:

his absence very acutely. She attributed immense importance to all
into a short canter, tugged at his traces. The shaft horse swayed from

his life, like you, merely trying not to harm others. But make our
are leaving.”
incompatibility of free will and inevitability does not exist as it does
“Here, I don’t grudge it—take it!” she said, evidently afraid of her



again. I must go there, Prince, and scare them a bit. It won’t take a
had not worn for a long time, he went into Bilíbin’s study fresh,
historical leader which serves to express the people’s life, as other
Andrew had felt in the impending reforms. He was going to dine that
train had not yet got out of Moscow and reached the Kalúga road when
then Davout’s, and then Ney’s—ran, as it were, the gauntlet of the
receding line of candles reflected in the glasses and expecting (from
six miles away, or whether they were near by in that sea of mist, no one


which the cadet under fire for the first time had experienced.
did not reflect that besides the couple of hours during which they saw
with its toothless open mouth. The storm was long since over and there

voilà donc enfin, cette fameuse ville! Il était temps,” * said he, and
The prince turned round to the overseer and fixed his eyes on him,
be of any use or no. Danger, cannon balls, and bullets were just what he

and she was in a spirited and energetic mood unusual with her. Some
Platón’s whole figure—in a French overcoat girdled with a cord, a
me?”

guard.
prepare a circular, memorandum, or report, skillfully, pointedly, and
“What next? Have you gone mad?... No one would let you!... Why, you go
so near him than the wine of her charm rose to his head, and he
have been done for, as his troops had neither provisions nor ammunition.
pointing to the right.
repulsive to him, but her feminine self-deception immediately supplied
at Otrádnoe not so much in fun as in earnest—and her mother was now
“Which house is it?” asked the driver.
“If there is anything... come back, Yákov Alpátych! For Christ’s sake
whole days together that he had no time to notice that he was thinking

“Mary,” said she, “tell me what I should do! I am afraid of being bad.
there only to witness the execution. With ever-growing horror, and no
advanced to Rostóv, having bared his head while still at a distance.
shyly.
spot rubbed or kissed, and it feels better when this is done. The child
trousseau had to be ordered and the house sold. Moreover, Prince Andrew

down to her neck and shoulders while Nicholas was speaking.
she, who till then had not shown any alarm, said that she would die of
world, but that I shall always exist and always have existed. I feel
And the only such conception known to historians is that of power.


are budding, and really every spring cold winds do blow when the oak
Andrew’s head with the confident, accustomed look with which one looks
a lack of bread, to move farther into the interior of Prussia, for only
Natásha came in and walking straight up to Pierre said, laughing and
forward. Of Bolkónski, nothing was said, and only those who knew him

Nicholas was with the Russian army in Paris when the news of his
he did not quite understand him. Moreover, Speránski, either because he
bayonets and cloudlets of smoke in the morning sun, there now spread a

something. He now experienced a glad consciousness that everything that
would not have happened,” he said.

enormous table would say: “Well, Dmítri, you’ll see that things are

When Borís and Anna Pávlovna returned to the others Prince Hippolyte

ordered us to retreat, and all our efforts and losses went for nothing.
has retained a love of idleness, but the curse weighs on the race not
The next day the regimental commander sent for Denísov, and holding his
any the worse off. In Siberia they lead the same animal life, and the
much since Princess Mary had last seen him. Then he had been a brisk,

“You at least must tackle him properly, or else if he goes on like
understand.... Bezúkhov, now, is blue, dark-blue and red, and he is
grew the countess. She began to think she would never live to see such

battle the soldiers excitedly try to get beyond the interests of their
“There is your child! Oh, a girl, so much the better!” said the

but looked at him with a contemptuous smile, waiting for the valet to
and terrible. There in that enormous, illuminated theater where the

The old ladies were pleased with the presents he brought them, and
singer” (he meant Natásha’s Italian singing master), “that’s
ratiocination any farther, when actions are clearly contrary to all

Pierre sighed, rose submissively, emptied his glass, and, waiting till
walked away from the fire.
much that the count held him up as a pattern to the other guests. Berg
he thought he was hiding. Awfully sweet! There, now he’s crying. Well,



and she found them on my table and said she’d show them to Mamma, and
The last of the Horse Guards, a huge pockmarked fellow, frowned angrily
you going, when you might remain here? You are faced by one of two


view he gazed at the Oriental beauty he had not seen before. It seemed
reality, and even more so because it was different.
faults he had—if he had any—were not of his making. So he did soften?...

would be good if everything were as clear and simple as it seems to
But the smile did not enhance Véra’s beauty as smiles generally do;
day until then, but he could no longer do it. He could not, any more

to hope from him—especially as he did not know how, and did not
they must go away, sorry as they were to abandon their property

occasions, and of his orders during the battle not being as good as
or German sources, and the incomprehensible surrender of whole corps
send.” And changing the subject, Kutúzov began to speak of the Turkish
overcoat, with a big snow-white beard and eyebrows and a ruddy face.
way, or we may soon bring the enemy to Moscow....
come from Prince Andrew, from Rome, in which he wrote that he would have

his own pleasure, chose to chat with Lieutenant Drubetskóy. More than
The Russian war should have been the most popular war of modern times:
Lelorgne d’Ideville, an interpreter, he overtook Napoleon at a gallop
To be so sent meant not only a reward but an important step toward
trampled them underfoot instead of keeping them, and on arriving at
former divinely appointed aims of the Jewish, Greek, or Roman nations,
asked if no French had strayed that way, the elder replied that some
“Oh-h-h! Dear souls, dear kind souls! Don’t let me die! My good
recruiting. None of them had yet seen the manifesto, but they all knew
On reaching Petersburg Pierre did not let anyone know of his arrival,
expressions of gratitude for her deliverance, as she termed what had
for doing. He imagined all sorts of possible contingencies, just like

“Yes... I... I... desire regeneration,” Pierre uttered with
more frivolous, as always happens with people who see a great danger
Dólokhov smiled. “Don’t trouble. If I want anything, I won’t
is connected with the Montmorencys through the Rohans, one of the best
at intervals the bugle calls and the shouts of the enemy could be heard
“It seems that there will be no need to bring Mary out, suitors are
grasp its meaning for a moment.
“Well then, remember, this is not a joke!”
and he approved of her intention. Under guise of a present for the
seemed to give way within him at this news. Dólokhov was a suitable and


As soon as the King began to speak loud and fast his royal dignity
was true and appropriate, yet, strange to say, everyone—the visitors
behind the Emperor. The Ápsheron men, excited by the Tsar’s presence,
as an adviser and ready at hand to replace Barclay. The Grand Duke
batteries of the enemy.
Frenchman had pushed away, was sitting near the fire patting something

thousands of bees sitting back to back and guarding the high mystery

bears!...”

when, if you remember, he posed as a sort of Marat at one of my soirees.

always hide it?” said the voice of the man who was stretching himself,
Ha, ha, ha! Mary!”
cup left here?”
will I overthrow it and thrice re-establish it!” he cried, raising his
and the men’s at the other.
the views he formed of men and circumstances at this time remained true


no more. She is so affected. Ask her in,” she said to the footman in a
take that force to be something quite different. They see it in what is
hussar regiment went and his jealousy had become a standing joke among
enlightenment?”
the better match and how the matter would be regarded at court. There
our forces before Smolénsk, which junction will be effected on the

these times!”
yards was all that separated them. The enemy ceased firing, and that
and somewhat to his satisfaction, that in the depth of her soul she too
Some twenty men of the Sixth Company who were on their way into the
round the table, the clatter of plates, knives, and glasses mingled with
everyone in the house, and never forgot anything. If he now incurred
their handkerchiefs to him.
less unity resulted. Preparations were made to fight the French before
commencement and conduct of the battle and thought it was done
Karáy—the borzoi was suddenly on the wolf, and they rolled together


in how far she was to blame for what had happened. She could not eat
excellency Prince Andrew himself gave me orders to move all the people
position, did not say a word about the past, and no longer feared to

Russian troops and their commander of the laurels they have been
of Rumyántsev, the French, Márya Fëdorovna, the Tsarévich, and others,

transport soldiers.
on holy days to church and after the service to jails and prisons on
into the heart of the country, but from their first entry into Russia

“Mot d’ordre.” *
addressing Pierre with a sad smile. “No distinctions made nowadays....
of the French army along the Smolénsk road became well defined, what
“I received news of his death, yesterday,” replied Prince Andrew
said that the colonel wished the officer to be brought to him, Ramballe

quite at random on one word and the murmur on another. This reading,
cause no phenomenon is conceivable. I raise my arm to perform an action
cry as she spoke of her loss, did not leave her memory.
“Pétya, you’re a stupid!” said Natásha.
At dawn the two new batteries established during the night on the

sinful nature, could think this of them: they could not forget that
demands on her time which could be satisfied only by renouncing society.
the wounded traveling with them were all distributed in the yards and
had said, but from his look it was clear that he had uttered a tender
“And why are they stopping? There’s no proper order!” said the

them, and will send these visitors to the devil. I will come back to
“If it’s inconvenient, please don’t,” said Berg. “Only I so wanted it,
something touching and solemn out of this address to his comrades. He
the desire to find those causes is implanted in man’s soul. And without
been composed in the Turkish campaign and now being sung in Austria, the
“It’s a bad business, eh?”
Christ, the Holy Spirit, Him!...
the Russian army, but might in other circumstances have led to its
said she, turning to her mother, who was tenderly gazing at her daughter

explained her wishes to him, she let him go to the drawing room.
“No, I won’t promise that. You don’t know how Kutúzov is pestered
to block its path. This was shown not so much by the arrangements it
bridge because he had not brought any burning straw with him like the
his most poetic recollection. But he went with the firm intention of
right light.... In my opinion perpetual peace is possible but—I do not
words and, uttering some meaningless oaths, slammed the door. The shed
the night ten miles from Olmütz and next morning were to come straight
dependence on cause.
are enchanting... from the moment I saw you I have never ceased...”
had become more friendly than ever. Denísov never spoke of Rostóv’s
entered their heads that it could have been otherwise at this meeting.
Count Rostóv approved of this suggestion, appreciating its
“Well now, gentlemen,” said Bilíbin, “Bolkónski is my guest in
remembered. “Yes, that’s it, she means to elope with him, but
The officer stood perplexed and his face showed indecision.
his head, and a short pipe in his mouth, came from behind a corner of
not submit to Speránski’s opinions entirely. Everything was right
Boguchárovo lay in a flat uninteresting part of the country among
Smolénsk road they ran holding the clapper of their bell tight—and often
carry him to the dressing station.”

respect, Pfuel evoked pity in Prince Andrew. From the tone in which
occasionally went within musket range, made their own arrangements
the construction of my own body. I chose one out of all the possible
had written in Natásha’s album.
people that interested him. The more interesting his letters were
it is!” thought the officer, and he rode round the whole camp. One man
needful was to get away as quickly as possible; and no one, not

from them in practical activity. But when she heard of Prince Andrew’s
“She said.... Oh yes! She said, ‘Girl,’ to the maid, ‘put on a
nose. That creature said: “You are angry, you are jealous, you would
Dolgorúkov, the victor at Wischau, was sent with Savary to negotiate
Andrew the feeling he had experienced toward him at their first meeting.
him. Rostóv himself did not know how or why he did it. He acted as he
an ordinary point of view are insane, to test, as it were, his personal
her from inside and outside the room and did not move. First she heard


sparkling black eyes, and black tousled mustache and hair. He wore an

paper money valueless which Napoleon so graciously distributed to the


Her first glance at Nicholas’ face told her that he had only come to
Gerásim, that sallow beardless old man Pierre had seen at Torzhók five
music on wet boards, and young girls and old men, and the nearly

management, disliked factories, the raising of expensive products,


“Your honor...” replied the shopman in the frieze coat, “your honor, in
What horses have you come with? Eh?”
all! But probably he knows it well enough and is only pretending. Shall


“Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen,” she counted on her slender

deep-rooted legitimists, and patriotic views were expressed to the
to side from habit, but her eyes, feverishly wide, looked fixedly before

reins.
“Dólokhov, Mary Ivánovna’s son,” she said in a mysterious

In the evening, after supper, when all were about to retire, Anatole
up!” came the company commander’s voice in jaunty tones. The
Borís bowed again politely.

Pierre paused, seeking a reply.
will be here any day now, so what are we waiting for? I ask just one
“She is a splendid match, a millionairess,” said Perónskaya. “And

Borís said no more, but looked inquiringly at his mother without taking
“What marvels!” she exclaimed, but hearing her master’s voice she turned
hunger recalled him from these reflections; he had to get something to
Rostóv and Ilyín, helped by Lavrúshka who had brought their kits,
millions of other men assumes an historic significance. The higher a man

“What d’you think of the treat? All on silver plate,” one of them

“And you, are you one of the doctors?”
old-fashioned coat and powdered wig and, aroused by anyone, told his
CHAPTER XII
This wounded man was Prince Andrew Bolkónski.
deigned to send your excellency a project submitted by me...”
soul to believe and he did believe, and felt a joyful sense of comfort,
“Ah, it can’t be avoided!” thought Nicholas, for the first and
Dólokhov often dined at the Rostóvs’, never missed a performance at
accounts and letters from Pénza (they have enormous estates there), and
yet more muffled than they had done six weeks before, for now all was

had been torn off.
“I don’t and can’t,” replied Nicholas, looking coldly at the baby. “A

breeches and arm.
not at all the decisive episode of the campaign. If so much has been
slender supple figure and felt her stirring so close to him and smiling
out his notebook and, leaning on the cannon, sketched a plan of the

elder, a peasant delegate, and the village clerk, who were waiting in
banquet. On his way back, he noticed Rostóv standing by the corner of a
steward there, who, bowing respectfully, looked into his face and at
he had assigned to each of them, for her dowry, an estate with three
Borís had not succeeded in making a wealthy match in Petersburg, so
feeling respect for our holy order and is too preoccupied and satisfied

entertained with conversation about the French embassy, at once began
on reconnaissance, all describe the position of the enemy’s army


they surrendered, Dólokhov dismounted and went up to Pétya, who lay
“Ooh!” wailed the girl, pointing to the wing. “That’s it, that was our
myself, if I fall asleep it’s finished. And then I am used to not
large pearls, entered the adjoining box rustling her heavy silk dress
the old and the new conception of history, and theology in the same way
position of the army reached him as he went along, and the appearance of


and despair, showing the possibility of consolation.”
We know that man has the faculty of becoming completely absorbed in
than a man who has been looking at a tuft of steppe grass through the
Pierre choked, his face puckered, and he turned hastily away, went back
“The enemy has quenched his fires and a continual noise is heard from
hesitated whether he should not apply for leave in order to see Natásha
tiresomely familiar faces of the men of the first battalion, and
don’t want to do this...”

“How shall I put it?” replied Natásha. “I was in love with
love for His creatures. Perhaps, I often think, she was too angelically
reached the bushes. Behind these were some Russian sharpshooters.

they much regretted not having taken Napoleon, or at least a marshal or
capabilities as well. These men, though enchanted with the sovereign
men wrote some books at that time. At the end of the eighteenth century
“What?” answered the old man absent-mindedly.
“Please place your money on the cards or I may get muddled in the
kindly they did not look at Pierre and did not know him. Wishing to
The dancer stopped, pulled off the loose piece of leather, and threw it
sarcastic smile under which he wished to hide his embarrassment, “to
as many persons are to me—father, sister, wife—those dearest to
he was trying to read something peculiar written at that moment on the

her head.

examining, for as soon as there is no freedom there is also no man. And

dear as one’s own mother!” said he. “Well, and have you little ones?” he
“Because it is better for me to come less often... because... No, simply
in there. In the farthest corner, on a bench beside a bed on which
entice him to marry my daughter and lend me the forty thousand rubles


“What a dandy you are today!” said Nesvítski, looking at
swayed from side to side.
where a parade does not begin till all the troops are assembled,” said
tomorrow... in the evening. You must come.... Come!”
army. You have brought your army corps to Pultúsk, routed: here it is
artificial phantasm of life he had served so long. He felt in his own
Napoleon’s experience and so-called military genius, every effort was
his hands to the blaze, and turned away his face.
the prince.
was a stroke of genius. Prince Auersperg feels his dignity at stake and
not to be acquainted with him.

Torzhók post station, either there were no horses or the postmaster

At the same time he felt that the deeper the ground sank under him the
without looking at him.
and still fewer men would be so well able and willing to make up out of
The arrangements for Natásha’s marriage occupied him for a while. He

herself she burst into tears of vexation and left the room. The old
path, Miss. Only, don’t look back.”
footmen and cooks were getting the supper, Count Bezúkhov had a
corded jacket and her nurse had told her that she, too, would be sewn up
breathing heavily and noisily.
entirely to her and to the home, and the children whom she had to bear,

Pierre told them.
“Oh, if anyone knew how little anything matters to me now,” she said.
prince, but could not get it quite right.)
our officers.”
his mind with peculiar clearness and force.
two ladies, he whispered to Hélène that he meant to choose Countess
brilliant suite surrounded him.
Napoleon, and he himself, thought otherwise.
Here!” exclaimed different voices; and the heavy breathing of the
in French. It was Count Rostopchín. He told Kutúzov that he had come

the mothers, wives, and children of the men who were going and should
going on in Russia without despair and without dismally racking his
people misery!” he said with a malignity that alarmed Princess Mary.
repeated from the opening words of the manifesto:

experience that feeling during those memorable days preceding the battle
sank back in his chair.

She felt all the time as if she might at any moment penetrate that
the doorway appeared a student with a crimson coat collar, an officer
In front of them rows of gray cloaks were already visible through the
But the farther he went and the more his attention was diverted by the
near Moscow either today or tomorrow morning, with her nephew.”

hurriedly kissing her gray hair, ran back to the maids who were turning
tens, will have the following significance:
“Tíkhon, what did we talk about at dinner?”
impatiently.
impression of those voices and faces and a sense of loneliness merged
saffron-yellow whites moved restlessly near the lower eyelids.
the face of each soldier and each officer seemed to say.
which intimated that he knew what he was about and if others did not
purpose she arranged a meeting between the young people at the bishop’s
that the sun or the earth had a property of attraction; he said that all
it from him are both equally impossible. But with that one nothing is
hut was made in the following manner, which had then come into vogue. A
“And I was looking for you,” said Natásha running out to him. “I
impossible to treat her with more delicacy, greater care, and at the
having once begun to analyze he ought to go on and explain further why


Prince Andrew when he drove up to the palace felt even more vigorous and
A French noncommissioned officer of hussars, in crimson uniform and a
because he could not. In the middle of a figure he beckoned to Rostóv
He was thinking that Prince Andrew was unhappy, had gone astray, did not

Having finished his inquiries and extorted from Daniel an opinion that

“Uncle” did not answer, but smiled.
six thousand. We have ten thousand carts, but we need other things as
read the dispatch. Hardly had he done so before he lowered his legs in
of the chiffonier and dressing table Berg involuntarily changed his tone
September, and except for a mob in the governor’s courtyard, assembled
would now have been surprised had he been absent.
prominent upper teeth, and wearing a black cloak and cap. This woman,
military rank—corporals and noncommissioned officers of whom there are
who looked at her, after being in her company and talking to her a
his boots. You can see everything from there; let’s go there,
person. It has now come to my knowledge that you lent him your carriage

“But what could have happened? What did I want? I want his death!” she
“J’ai assez fait l’empereur; il est temps de faire le général,” * but
history, as at present expounded, can be dealt with, and anyone who
her eyes off him, and smiling and holding her breath. He gave her a
Some of the peasants said that these new arrivals were Russians and
Mikháylovna for two thousand rubles, and asked him what he thought of
Three days later the little princess was buried, and Prince Andrew went
in secret be turned against them; let them fall before Thy servants’
their orderlies were to be seen. They were all looking at the count and
reassured he was that everything would be as it should. “He will not
Dólokhov’s back in his white shirt, and his curly head, were lit
the tears from his eyes and from the letter, then having dried her
impossible to picture a future with Princess Mary, because he did not
walked without feeling the pain, though at night his feet were more
that he would come or would write to her.
fascinating marquise of thirty-five and at the same time for a charming,
of shoes) and listening to the regular tap of the heel and creak of
officer and a wounded hero, would it be right to remind him of herself
knapsacks, bayonets, long muskets, and, under the shakos, faces with
progress, looks for these conditions in the greatness, wealth, freedom,

immediately the sound of axes and swords, the crashing of branches,
would have made them.
had filled his solitude at Boguchárovo and then in Switzerland and Rome,
the representative of authority and of the Tsar. “Had I been simply



over the Enns, and then guessed that the card that came first to hand
“It’s certainly well written,” said Túshin, “but that’s not
soldier was doing to her.
tangled black hair.
street, and the adjutant’s unceasing moans could still be heard.
sat upright on the sofa and listened with sparkling eyes. She tried
his old friend and the possessor of such enormous wealth, to the caprice
he used afterwards to say), and gave expression to his own feelings and
the nonsense talked by the Austrian generals. Shinshín, standing close
a life I can’t decide or think properly about anything. One’s head
“Andrew, I bless you with this icon and you must promise me you will
you—is that that man suffers, and this Don Juan, wicked fellow, is
sister-in-law’s friendship for you. She was not expecting us?”
river, and Zúbova, and in the Krémlin.... Just look! There’s not half of
He went over his vices in his mind, not knowing to which of them to give
ranks, and it ceased altogether every time the thud of a successful
that came upon him at Hollabrünn, which was clearly impossible. But
and began to talk business.

the march: in their greatcoats, and packs, and without any preparation
Smolyanínov, and it mortified him to think that the newcomer was an
of his heart; it did not enter his head that a pastime so pleasant to
We can understand that the matter seemed like that to contemporaries.

smell of stable yards, delightful to Pierre at that moment. He could see
seems as much alive as other hives.
“How easy it is, how little effort it needs, to do so much good,”
officer pounced on the soldiers who were in the shops, but at that
The princess, holding her little dog on her lap with her thin bony

Ivánovich Kutúzov:
In the sunshine the air was warm, and that warmth was particularly
clear upright figures; he emptied the glass of warm champagne that was
impossibility of crossing the frontier with a crowd of tatterdemalions,

deeply loved affianced wife—the same Natásha Rostóva who used to be so
“Those were extremes, no doubt, but they are not what is most
“Put on your white dress. I like it,” was what he said.
CHAPTER VII
silent, still looking derisively at him and evidently not listening to
Andrew, “one believes in him because he’s Russian, despite the novel
accept this challenge or not. Anatole did not release him, and though
years before, it seemed impossible that the little creature who lived
Old Rostóv could not tell his wife of what had passed without tears, and
police officers and even the police master himself stood at the porch.
three forms.
machine to imagine that a shaving that has fallen into it by chance
imagination at this still and mystic hour of night. And these pictures
soldier’s mind that the relative strength of the armies had changed and
He did not finish, but gave a painfully unnatural smile.

up to Denísov.
over these images, repelling with horror only the last one, the
admit the persons who would be coming that evening, but not to let them

you mind? Kiss me,” said Sónya.

common soldier prisoners were stationed. He wanted to talk to them. On
for the twenty-thousandth time and lay down. But hardly had he done so
and butterflies knock awkwardly against the walls of the hive in their
that time and now the whole French army was there. Ermólov wished to act

mistake in speaking about the distribution of the grain she wished to
himself up like a black pillar at sight of the Emperor, Napoleon stopped
sacred all-embracing teaching is clear to me. Human sciences dissect

“Sónya! When will he come back? When shall I see him! O, God, how

son’s having received a decoration, so he sent that printed army order
recruits to our regiments; the fine weather; the long rest the Russian
whose activities at that period were most useful.
    CHAPTER XXII
stayed with him during the whole of his imprisonment, but even grew in
more unjust. He is an honest and very punctilious German.”
the yard gazing at his worn-out boots with lowered head and a faint
did not now say those former terrible words to him, but looked simply,

speak, so now she could not believe that that little creature could be
Spaniards, through the Catholic clergy, offer praise to God for their
common fatherland. I should have demanded the freedom of all navigable


then he did everything so simply and with such assurance!) Mademoiselle
“You see I have known him a long time and am also fond of Mary, your
trumpets of the first cavalry regiment played the general march. It
“Oh no, let me off, Countess,” Denísov replied.
both began to cry and kissed again. Mademoiselle Bourienne also began to
Tíkhon knew his master’s habit of sometimes thinking aloud, and
Julie was preparing to leave Moscow next day and was giving a farewell
difficulties only because they were apprehensive as to how the matter
Simon sighed and stooped to straighten the leash a young borzoi had
“That’s Mary Nikoláevna! They went inside the garden when these wolves
out of a swamp by its tail, skin it, slink in among the French, or walk
shamefaced feeling with which men pray at moments of great excitement
the infinitely small can now yield solutions in other more complex
off... and then everything... So you see... I never told this to anyone
boldly, with saucy gaiety, confident that her prank would be taken in
The colonel was a stout, tall, plethoric German, evidently devoted to

Carriages kept driving away and fresh ones arriving, with red-liveried
rejects all knowledge that does not come from Him; and the less we seek
in the mean jocular way common to anonymous letters said that he saw
and to get away as soon as Mademoiselle George’s performance was over.
Pierre, not knowing whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled. His
she should rouse the dozing baby.
and law, that look established human relations between the two men. At

sat down languidly on the sofa: he felt it unpleasant to have dropped
CHAPTER XXVIII

when we know what is needed!” said he, trying to be heard above the
sole aim was the children’s moral welfare delighted him. Had Nicholas

Jerusalem, and he responded in the same manner, asking me with a mild
her sons!’ Isn’t it so, Papa?” said he.
moment these men might have been seized with horror at what they were
knelt on when praying on Trinity Sunday, and placed it before the doors
headlong after Anna Mikháylovna and, dashing at her, flung herself on
family’s, and his friends’, and the enemy’s intention to kill him
all the figures on it: the sun, the moon, a hammer, a plumb line, a
unexecuted. All the impossible orders inconsistent with the course of
after the murder of the duc there was one martyr more in heaven and one
suburb.

handkerchief to his wounded cheek and pointing to the fleeing soldiers.
9.”
resonance was best, Natásha began to sing her mother’s favorite song.

calm, and penetrating, a look I loved so well and seem to see before me
red and frightened face, whipping up his skinny horse. Several officers
Zherkóv was followed by an officer of the suite who rode up to the
question of the dowry, nor spoken to his wife about it. At one time the
CHAPTER III
Andrew—promised to do as she wished. Having briefly and exactly
They, in Pierre’s mind, were the soldiers, those who had been at the
“Can I see the count?” Pierre again asked.

carried the whole length of the table.
à présent la pluie et le beau temps. * He’s too proud for anything.
all your valuables.”
Half an hour later there appeared among the other mummers in the
heavily aside to intercept it. But the quickness of the wolf’s

jocular face of the general, he took him aside and in an excited voice
“Splendid! What a horse he will be!” he thought with a smile, and
cutting off a leg or an arm for me.”
One of the men got up and went over to the Fifth Company.
passage. He was awaiting Pétya’s return in a state of agitation,
confusion would come of this battle undertaken against his will, and as
the dew, and from the bayonets of the troops crowded together by the
father, Count Bezúkhov, and showed them her own box. Princess Hélène
clouds, but no rain. The ground was damp but not muddy, and the troops

this may be my only chance of seeing the Emperor. It won’t be long
their courage before him.
leave of Rostóv in the club porch.
“Inform the prince that I the bridge fired!” said the colonel
Princess Mary grew quite unconscious of her face and coiffure. The
and not value her pure affection and devotion to me?” She went up
yet occupied that region, and the Russians—the uninjured and slightly

princesses, sat in a corner knitting a stocking. Pierre had never been
    CHAPTER XIV
calling him in a whisper.
bewildered. They unlocked their shops and locked them up again, and
He shaved and scented himself with the care and elegance which had
sleeve with her finger, saying:


it may be reflected in them all, and they and I may live in harmony!”

countess!”
therefore you seek wisdom and virtue. Is that not so?” said the
Natásha last saw him. He passed up to the front rows, not noticing
Dólokhov, and words of honor?... All nonsense! One might kill and rob
de Tolly was quartered nearly three miles from the Emperor. He received
Smolénsk and were drawing nearer and nearer to Moscow. Napoleon’s

his hand. Why should not the same sort of thing happen to me? I know

punished by an order to burn down his houses.
with his cap on the back of his black head and a cloak hanging jauntily
see it. But you also say that our oath of allegiance is a conditional
the frozen window, she felt still sadder and more in love, and forgot
goal. Suddenly the threads that moved them began to slacken and become
that it was madness to leave a height which commanded the country around

Russian man and woman.
At the next review, they say, the Emperor did not once deign to address
Having written this and given the paper to Alpátych, he told him how
governed only by infinite love for us, and so whatever befalls us is for
as a man recently returned from abroad, in a political conversation in
Afterwards when he had received a name and wealth he dared not think of


factory hand, a thin, sallow-faced lad of eighteen in a loose coat.
and a campfire was built before it. They beat the tattoo, called the
What’s one to do, my dear?”
directed in 1812.
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project

that she made a sign to an officer who drove past, whom Sónya took to

The day after the opera the Rostóvs went nowhere and nobody came to see
‘but what I am most sorry for is this old man. Don’t let him suffer
campaign that ended in Jena and Auerstädt, but he did not see the least

handsome young officer entering his room. Pierre paused. He had left
had said so-and-so and this minister so-and-so, seemed to him very

city is taken; the Russian army suffers heavier losses than the opposing

“All the same! They say this one is the commander of all the Emperor
knocking it over, and at the same instant Rostóv, without knowing why,
him. That is why I told him... Was it all right?” she added, suddenly
Napoleon, the man of genius, did this! But to say that he destroyed his
There’s one talking to him and he has turned away,” she said,
his captain.
with his own hands, whose weak nerves rendered him unable to face
just come out of a hot bath.”



“Yes, the oak is right, a thousand times right,” thought Prince
took his seat and told the coachman to drive him to his country house in

of him: when Achilles has covered that tenth, the tortoise has covered
over.” And after stumbling a few staggering steps right up to the
“Tell me, when did the battle begin?” he asked hurriedly.
a battery to their left. The smoke above it had not yet dispersed. Two

“He is dozing,” said Anna Mikháylovna, observing that one of the
“No, Mamma, but I’m so sorry for him. I don’t know how I’m to
As the war had caught him in the service, Nicholas Rostóv took a close
forehead and a long face of unusual and peculiar whiteness, who was
broad in the hips, and with prominent shoulder blades. His face was
him absurd and barbarous—monstrous collisions in which so many blunders
to what regiment he belonged. Dólokhov, as if he had not heard the
officials of all kinds, tradesmen, artisans, and peasants—streamed into
by the law of coincidence thousands of minute causes fitted in and
joyful it seemed, that her son, the scarcely perceptible motion of whose
who will not refuse to accompany you.”
of the actual battlefield. They began to meet wounded men. One with a
apparently immersed in his own thoughts.
distinctly heard. “I thank you all for your hard and faithful service.
not a distinction,” said the diplomatist—“a gift, rather.”
muskets and went on their knees. ‘Pardon!’ they say. That’s only one

Shcherbáty was the only man who dealt with such matters. Denísov had
angrily—“that one wouldn’t have done for you. As if I don’t know what
“In a minute, in a minute,” he said, dipping his pen.
absolute truth.
After her life in the country, and in her present serious mood, all this
onto the highroad.
CHAPTER IV
“Natásha, I have asked you not to speak of that. Let us talk about you.”
Pierre was there too, buttoned up since early morning in a nobleman’s
commit crime, die, or perform deeds of highest heroism, and so he could
    CHAPTER IV
he began to cry.



pleasure of deceiving me, if it really were true. Yes, if it were true,

dismay the executioner who was undressing the other man.
When Scherbínin came galloping from the left flank with news that the
Several times during the march false alarms had been given and the
    * “Bring the boyars to me.”
society of her relatives—Countess Mary, and her brother, her mother, and
that the last of the biscuits were being doled out at the rate of half a

    Stop, dear maiden, I entreat—

abuse, dreadful words, ejaculated one after the other.
a chance to escape, or to trick us, now that we certainly have him in

your return,” she added in a whisper.
and it seemed plain to her that those words, which had then so comforted
and for the issue of the whole battle. “But be that what it may,”
“I am quite of your opinion,” replied Nicholas, flaming up, turning
After the burning of Smolénsk a war began which did not follow any
Of the behavior of the eldest princess and Prince Vasíli she spoke
As they passed near a church in the Khamóvniki (one of the few unburned

youth, with a stony look on his face, and rigid and uplifted arm, stood
participation of the Deity in human affairs.
waiting at the porch,” said the adjutant.
thief?”
to occur because it had to. Millions of men, renouncing their human
up to the hothouse; some of the glass panes were broken, and of the
Why are you like this?”
adjutant to Raévski’s Redoubt. His horse lagged behind the adjutant’s
same time felt shy.

He waited a moment to see whether the cornet would answer, but he turned
suddenly became unnaturally merry and chattered incessantly to the
out through its passages with bundles. Tradesmen and their assistants
on to place an heroic torch in the hands of their own people, it is
“You forget yourself, Colonel. I am not considering my own pleasure
wishes. To Sónya he wrote separately.

to her shortsighted eyes. Turning from Princess Mary he went up and
special enclosure where there are oats—that this very ram, swelling with


and that her husband was a cross laid upon her by God. Prince Vasíli
of it. How much more complex than this is the game of war, which
force their way through them with bayonets.
Andrew...” she said timidly after a moment’s silence, “I have a
“Besides, Monsieur Kiril, you have only to say a word to the captain,
batteries ranged on the slopes of the Pratzen Heights, directed at our

military and civil authorities, and your tears will soon cease to flow!
curly head to her knees and made the whole room ring with her laughter.
Kalúga road and began to enter Formínsk, where only Broussier had
She told him about her romance with Prince Andrew and of his visit to
saying that your regiment would be sure to be better than Mamónov’s.”
this life I did not and do not understand.”

now numbered only nine hundred was one of the first to arrive that night
that little Rostóva is very charming. There’s something fresh,
spread a greatcoat on the ground for the sick man, and brought some
That unknown quantity is the spirit of the army, that is to say, the

the peasants caught the commissaries who ventured too far out of town
the Emperor should first be carefully and skillfully prepared, and then
her foot into the other. Sónya, when he came in, was twirling round and
incomprehensible—the death of one she loved.
for however man’s free will may be restricted, as soon as we recognize
Rostóv gazed at what was happening before him as at a hunt. He felt
tortoise, the tortoise has covered one tenth of that distance ahead

them, and considers no one among you his enemy except those who disobey
When little Nicholas was brought into Prince Andrew’s room he looked at
tapers burning before the golden covers of the icons, the Krémlin

now, the whole difference of opinion is based on the recognition or
word of honor not to take anything more till the spring. Now only twelve
she knew let her have the keys of the catacombs, and how she, taking
to Sónya for all she was doing for his mother and greatly admired her
A third of the visitors had already arrived, but the Rostóvs, who were
Prince Andrew’s relations with Natásha might, if he recovered, be
“Ah, my dear fellow, what a battle we have gained! God grant that
smile, her traveling hood, and a stray lock of her hair... and there

bloodstained men in various garbs stood, sat, or lay. Around the wounded
the floor. He was telling me something, and I wished to show him my
over the blonde lady and paying her mythological compliments with a
always happens in such cases rivalry sprang up as to which should get

young shoots of grass were already sprouting, which taking root would so
did it.
However often experiment and reasoning may show a man that under the
“Prince Vasíli arrived in Moscow yesterday. I hear he has come on
After looking at him Napoleon smiled.
activity was so unswervingly directed to a single aim; and it would be
and the distinguished dignitary who bore the title of “Collector
whose action are beyond our ken, we get the conception of a minimum of
    CHAPTER XXX
Bolkónski, who spoke with suppressed agitation.
up feet and all in the corner of the sofa, tearing and twisting
whole district, Balashëv was brought to Vílna—now occupied by the
The door opened and the old prince, in a dressing gown and a white


of the nobility; but he considered himself entitled to spend the eve
they would unharness the horses. Alpátych had gone out to admonish them,
Next day Nicholas took his mother’s letter and went to see Princess
fate. It is in your hands.”
thought had occurred to him and so it belonged to her also. And he told



husband. Prince Andrew’s eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy did he
Nicholas came in serious and taciturn. Princess Mary seemed even quieter
battlefield galloped up.
he tried to continue the conversation he had begun with Princess Mary he
“Where are they off to now?” thought Rostóv.
very easily and quickly on three legs, as if disdaining to use all
the general state of affairs, and when Rostóv spoke of these matters
“Yes, we are soldiers of the Ápsheron regiment. I was dying of fever. We
of something too large and unsuited to the place, came over her face
saw by her face that she was glad both at what had happened and at the
deferential young man who had entered. “Bring me...” he reflected

your old father...” he paused unexpectedly, and then in a querulous
thing in the capital though new to them in the provinces.
and a castle with a park surrounded by the waters of the confluence of
proclamations were circulating in the villages, and that if the princess
It really was Melyukóvka, and maids and footmen with merry faces came
men I held the enemy at bay for thirty-five hours and beat him; but he
took up a Cossack whip and went to the bridge where he began with shouts
“That is the Dutch ambassador, do you see? That gray-haired man,”
eyes. What she found hardest to bear was to know that on such occasions
“Michael Ivánovich!” cried the old prince to the architect who,
in retirement and had now no influence in political affairs, every high
tremulous voice, and in the weary eyes that looked over her spectacles
Pierre who has inherited all the property and has besides been
Well, and you?”
falls on the things about him—we see that each of these circumstances

stuff. Such magnanimity and sensibility are like the magnanimity and
bottle. I’ll do it.... Bring a bottle!”
resolution. Can it be that I have none?”
The great halls were full. In the first were the nobility and gentry in
The magnificent reception room was crowded. Everyone stood up
“Yes, I will.”

Having looked at Natásha he approached his sister, laid his well gloved
“Well, you see, I’ll tell you the whole secret of dueling in two
longed to kiss his father’s hands and kneel to beg his forgiveness,


in the village of Górki.
“Thank you; you saved me, my dear fellow!” said Túshin.

“I will, I will, only tell me! You won’t? Then I will go and tell at
Princess Mary, still thinking of that morning’s conversation with her

As he said this his eyes and face expressed more than coldness—they
and pleasure for themselves as possible. In the troubled waters of

engagement) he would say something about men, honor, and the
we who are such fools. If you have no pity on me, have some for the

those who possess power. This mirrorlike gaze and those delicate hands
“Look, his mustache and eyelashes are all white!” said one of the
If history had retained the conception of the ancients it would have
Berg smiled again.
Often, approaching the chest of drawers containing this secret treasure,
bags into the carts, got their muskets ready, and formed rank. The

had been present at the beginning of the battle.
“You may go,” he said to Anatole.
he had been beside the gun, he had heard the voices of the officers
strangely consoling. His intention of killing Napoleon and his
He had nothing to do in Moscow, but he had noticed that everyone in the
another group.
added.

book from the high desk.
have something to eat.”
From the other side a battalion commander rode up.

Mikháylovna enthusiastically, quite forgetting all the humiliation she
The men of this party said and thought that what was wrong resulted

NAPOLEON
silver and crystal gleamed, so did the ladies’ toilets and the gold
in my house—let him marry and live by himself. Perhaps you will go
“We see light again, since his Serenity has been appointed, your
confidence the personality of the Freemason inspired in him and his own
without any command being given, apparently obstructed by something in
to understand that this council could not alter the inevitable course
A man in motion always devises an aim for that motion. To be able to go
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments

“Why am I not free? Why was I in such a hurry with Sónya?” And he
out a notebook, hurriedly scribbled something in pencil, tore out the

of the meetings of a committee of which Berg was a member. He remembered
coachman, and two orderlies.
her parents, the consideration of all that had caused the illness,

could I, and it cannot be seen if one looks on our life here as the end
word or slight rearrangement kept the conversational machine in steady,
of hand and at once disperses uncontrollably as soon as it reaches rich
pursuit—the chase—for which his father kept a large establishment.
heart. “What a foot, my dear fellow! What a glance! A goddess!” he
that it is the lieutenant colonel himself,” said the esaul, who was fond
they are fattened, they will at least know that all that happened to the
hurt the back of his head; then when they propped him against the
diverse chances which will be decided on the instant by the fact that

his father, Mary, and Natásha, than he had then. He understood it
she covered her face with her hands.

Russia were settling near the fortress of Braunau and burdening the
there was nothing between the squadron and the enemy, and again that
endure this man who is a menace to everything.”
should have to stand and guard equally cold and hungry Russians who
The countess was sitting with her companion Belóva, playing

saw the beloved features that were so deeply engraved on his memory. The
which the mob tried to end the work that had been begun, those who were
regards himself personally, both in mind and body, as irresistibly

Some days after Anatole’s departure Pierre received a note from Prince
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
his last parting from his father and his wife; he remembered the days
agitation whether going into action now, with a single division, would

“Why shouldn’t I marry her?” he asked his daughter. “She’ll

“Well, what happened? What did he say? Natásha, how glad I am
Pierre met the old count, who seemed nervous and upset. That morning
From the moment she had been told that morning of Prince Andrew’s wound
“But you know the wise maxim your excellency, advising one to expect
of corn, scrutinized the strips of ryefield which here and there were
thing that was destroying the French army, the booty on which the
has them to serve a general purpose incomprehensible to man.


be heard. Pierre offered the use of his carriage, which had overtaken
The battle had begun! Prince Andrew turned his horse and galloped back
the question for me to think of marrying her. And it must needs happen
Prince Andrew smiled just perceptibly and for the first time, but


Kuzmínichna, raising her arm threateningly. “Go and get the samovar to
packed up. The Empress Elisabeth, however, when asked what instructions
“That’s all right. No one thinks you a coward, but that’s not the
least obstruction to that action either from things around me or from
settled himself in the saddle, and, feeling that he was ready, looked
lights of shops, houses, and street lamps, fine carriages, and all that
gentlemen” he always drove himself and never demanded anything for

the icon. They, those strange men he had not previously known, stood out
father or at Natásha.
whippers-in. Besides the family, there were eight borzoi kennelmen

said Princess Mary.
not see ten paces ahead. Bushes looked like gigantic trees and level

Mary that he was even glad that the family connection between them
of streets the patrol arrested five more Russian suspects: a small
or horses. He gave me his word he would not retreat, but suddenly sent
that it was impossible to defend Moscow and that it would have to be
who were to leave Moscow. The loaded carts were still standing in the
words and they alone expressed what he wanted to say and solved the
understood the meaning of the council differently. It seemed to her that
son has sacrificed himself for his mother,” as people were saying.

“He is warming himself there by the bonfire. Ho, Vesénya!

come in a moment. Petrúshka!” he called to his valet: “Come here,
“Why ‘What the devil’?” said Borís, picking it up and reading
“How? Am I uglier?”
With a slight inclination of her head, Natásha stepped back quickly to
“That is probably the work of Vinesse,” said Pierre, mentioning
were for the most part not the coarse and indecent saws soldiers
indifference, and benevolence toward all, which cannot be acquired
intending to rest if but for a moment, eat something, and try to sort
maintained with heat that peace was impossible between a legitimate
“Cette armée russe que l’or de l’Angleterre a transportée des

that he has learned to be fulfilled.
that.”
beside Hélène. “This happiness is not for you,” some inner voice
to one side in his saddle. His horse, having galloped up to a campfire
disorder. In and out of the hive long black robber bees smeared with
The count danced well and knew it. But his partner could not and did not
directions from the Krémlin into which they had first marched. The
dining room where his daughter-in-law, Princess Mary, and Mademoiselle


battle of Borodinó, there was a soiree, the chief feature of which was


and, as always happens, had got somewhere, but not to their appointed
“No, Monsieur Dessalles, I will ask my aunt to let me stay,” replied
have mistaken us for my father. This is the one matter in which she

CHAPTER XIX
“The first man that turns up—she forgets her father and everything
talking on all sides.
grief to forget what he had said), that it was impossible to expect
melancholy enjoyment imagined his own destruction and heroic endurance.

With the precision and definiteness customary in addressing prisoners,

radiant look which caused the plainness of her face to be forgotten.
expose to a bullet, and then you congratulate us on the victory! Admit

the officer had gone away, Denísov, who did not himself know what
difficult work of directing the storing and packing of their things and

be nothing, or mere content without form.

“Ulyulyulyulyu!” shouted Nicholas.
The hospital was in a small Prussian town that had been twice devastated

entrance. The prince was working at the lathe and after glancing round
answer. At last he moved up to Pierre and, taking the kerchief that lay
descending the valley. That moment of moral hesitation which decides
The duel between Pierre and Dólokhov was hushed up and, in spite of
in his life.
seemed to him that Bogdánich rode so near in order to show him his
all known wars.
village the sentinels of Davout’s infantry corps detained him as
said Natásha in the tone of one being deprived of her property.


seemed to me to have an excellent heart, and that is the quality I value
shopkeeper, two seminary students, a peasant, and a house serf, besides
and seeing that the elder visitor was not listening, he turned to the

with the cross at the church, and she intends to welcome him in the
within a week. Set off immediately for Moscow. Let me know at once when

noticed), twenty thousand were inevitably doomed to wounds and death
the third!”
“To Prince Vasíli. He was so kind. He at once agreed to everything,
alternated with despair. Several times he addressed a prayer to God
had not already broken faith with Prince Andrew, and again she found
CHAPTER XIV
which a faint smile forgot to fade though his features now expressed
answer than the one Prince Andrew gave to this naïve question.


with galoshes on his bare feet, stood in the anteroom. On seeing Pierre
the pretense of illness, from his daughter’s distress, and by the
side.

announced that the carriage was ready, and Márya Dmítrievna rose with

Just as “Uncle’s” pickled mushrooms, honey, and cherry brandy had
is fulfilled, that opinion gets connected with the event as a command
wanted to show him that his losses were an achievement that made her
the icons and there was a pleasant scent of flowers and burnt pastilles.



“I was never pleased at Bolkónski’s engagement to Natásha,” said the
would have a dispute, but long afterwards Pierre to his surprise and
visit him in Moscow or at Bald Hills later on; and if not, the wedding,
well-ordered troops. But contrary to what had always happened in their
bitch with prominent black eyes, got up on seeing her master, stretched

said to him and still did not see what was before his eyes, but he now

see this, but on the Russian side every effort was made to hinder the
his hand to the lad.
bed. He felt that only in the ordinary conditions of life would he
still heard the insane despairing screams growing fainter in the
hands of the watch, and the valves and wheels of the engine, and the
I’ll fetch a piece of cloth at once for such an honorable gentleman,
mortifying flesh that came from the wound, began examining that dreadful
chevalier,” and who was going with her to Nízhni.

“Yes, I’ll come with you,” replied Pierre, looking round for his groom.
a dinner where there was no place for him. In the next hut there was a
change their views, that the general, whom he had greatly respected till
battery and the heroic endurance of Captain Túshin and his company,”
landlord.
much.
know the count,” said the adjutant cheerfully, with a smile of pride,
simply dull. Besides, I was very busy.”
are the steppes of Asia! It’s a nasty country all the same. Au revoir,
conditions are unknown to us. They say that historical personages have

of the Rostóvs’ house at Otrádnoe. He heard merry girlish cries
Denísov raised his head, coughed, and made no answer.
Moscow to carry off to the villages what had been abandoned in the
was not with them, the count decided to stay with Márya Dmítrievna
“What’s the matter with you? Are you ill?”
sent you. Religious! I don’t interfere with anyone’s belief... I
and begrudge nothing.”
Prince Andrew was to leave next evening. The old prince, not altering

Sónya was always the first excuse Countess Mary found for feeling
Prince Andrew needed his father’s consent to his marriage, and to
surpassed my expectations. I thank you in the name of the Fatherland!
him, from his daughter to his serfs, the prince was sharp and invariably
“Well then, tell him so.”
without fighting and of fortresses without a siege must incline Germans
drawing room with its old furniture resembled the solemn gathering of


visit Mademoiselle George; that at her house he came upon Bonaparte,

pass, allows his entire army to elude it. In Africa a whole series of
Rostóv became thoughtful.
special force. No matter what he thought about, he always returned to
triumphantly, and to have the last word she promptly changed the
attack that night, he decided, with the rapidity with which young people

“Everything has been spoiled, everything muddled, everybody thought they


it to the servant and got up. All rose and continuing to talk loudly
stint yourself, we’ll settle afterwards,” he added, turning to


and easily into the child—who was already afraid that Auntie might at


After growing confused from pain while being carried into the hut he
    CHAPTER XVII
but on the left flank the columns of infantry, cavalry, and artillery,
of his battalion, his steward, his major-domo, and various petitioners.
Bonaparte, that they desire to see Prince Auersperg, and so on. The

Nicholas neither saw nor heard Daniel until the chestnut, breathing
they all three went along the corridor to the first row of boxes.
she mentioned Napoleon and some other exalted personages), that she had

been unable to pass because of a drunken crowd rioting in front of
activity is considered by the historians of culture to be the cause or
was bright, joyous sunshine on Natásha’s face as she gazed tenderly at

“Now listen to me. I’m telling you this for the last time. Why

“Uncle, forgive me, I did that... unintentionally,” he said, pointing to



both sides of Pierre.

places and were silent, or, if they walked about and talked, attached

all, and without promising to help me?” thought Pierre, rising with
all for his relations was the fact that there was still a possibility of
soldiers who had been long in hospital. This was Speránski, Secretary
     http://www.gutenberg.org
feeling of a hare fleeing from the hounds. One single sentiment, that
Instead of the demand of four months earlier to withdraw from Pomerania,
the ball, in those brightly lighted rooms—with music, flowers, dances,

terror and overflowing with love.



September 2 Moscow has been in the hands of the enemy. Your last reports
“That’s it. Come on!... I was sure of it,” began “Uncle.” (He
all the pages there were excellent drawings. And in my dream I knew

The count spoke timidly, as he always did when talking of money matters.
expressed by details of the morbid character of Iván the Terrible and by


contented fellows, satisfied with their position, “while I am still
society.
And with the decision and tenderness that often come at the moment of

are led, modern history should study not the manifestations of power but
“Ah, she is indeed a darling! I’ll send her to you.”

“Now then, you foxes!” said another, laughing at some militiamen who,

her.

sentimentality, old wives’ tales, or is she right?” he asked himself.
down. One bullet and then another whistled past him. He mustered his
mechanically to sing: “Save from calamity Thy servants, O Mother of
angry—but I know you will not marry her. I know, heaven knows how, but
on him—though it happened not to be the Emperor—frantically shouted

went about all that morning as though facing a cocked and loaded gun
Kutúzov here woke up, coughed heavily, and looked round at the
“Well, are you ready?” asked Balagá.

Denísov’s face puckered still more.

only to give measure to the words. As a result of this the unconsidered
find some way of taking on herself the excess of grief that crushed her
fathers of the Society of Jesus?”

“Why, for this reason! My father is one of the most remarkable men of
standing.

from the right flank, beside which the carriage passed the company,
answer to the question that engrossed him. He wrote the words L’Empereur
to the farther side of the bridge and stopped the infantry. Beside the
The latter was riding with a sullen expression on his face.

Karatáev for its master.
chief steward wrote every year telling him of fires and bad harvests,

Russian soil.
storeroom. A third case was needed and servants had gone to fetch it.
liberty nor his resolution to punish his wife.



saying!”
not in it, and she could not and did not know how to do anything except
caused the floods to abate.
gray, sat beside countess Mary with his general’s tunic unbuttoned;
reaction.”
Alexander unpleasantly, he rode up and saluted.

from his cheek. Prince Andrew forced his way to him.
know that pair of women’s gloves?” (He referred to the Masonic
you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through
drawing room with some maps which he spread on a table, and put

Vasíli to Anna Pávlovna.
of Prince Andrew, which seemed to her so apart from all human affairs
advantages of drawing nearer to its supplies caused the army to turn
will all end in nothing!”
conversing with Napoleon’s aides-de-camp who surrounded him.
regiment. Another time, general attention was attracted by a small brown

CHAPTER III
exaggerated reports became current about them and about the position of
His huge figure, with arms hanging down and with a puckered, though
said a gunner, coming up to Túshin.
regiments form bands and scour the countryside and put everything
was growing cold on the bare floor.
especially when he wanted to do something to please her, or feared that
which the Rostóvs always attended. He was pointedly attentive to Sónya
“Grounds of personal ambition maybe,” Speránski put in quietly.
what had been said to him and following these verbal fireworks with
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
Vítebsk after the French had occupied that town, gave a brief account of


enemy, do not avenge thyself except by doing him good. Thus fulfilling

with whom he was on intimate terms.

“Another romance,” said the militia officer. “Really, this general
her to her own room and made her lie down on the bed. Natásha lay down,
“Why have you thrown that away?” asked Borís.
consist of the contents of a book of funny anecdotes. Before Magnítski
they say.”
pale face and glittering eyes.
appeared, quite out of keeping with his features, that seemed to deride
groom.
“Whom do you mean, Aunt?” asked Nicholas.
there was no reason why it should not reach the Pávlograd regiment,
The room was crowded with small pieces of furniture, whatnots,
plump white hands deftly took from it the bottles and various hors

“Andrew, why didn’t you warn me?” said the princess, with mild
Davout was to Napoleon what Arakchéev was to Alexander—though not a


old count’s with a trotter from the Orlóv stud as shaft horse,
It is as if he thought my Bolkónski would not approve of or understand
“Well, how is he?”
humanity fifty years ago as a present-day professor who from his

“You told me to remind you of the officer Dólokhov, reduced to the
responsibility and vice versa.
the forest, her feelings, and a talk with a beekeeper she met, and
    * “You can’t pass!”
The tall, fair-haired General Buxhöwden stood, leaning his back against
Natásha was gazing at her, but seemed afraid and in doubt whether to say
leaned his arms on the back of the sofa and closed his eyes. Pierre

Europe, or a certain kind of European culture called “progress” appear
“No, gentlemen, you have had your sleep, but I have not slept for two
Bogdánich was a brick: he told you you were saying what was not true.
finished.

began her speech.

forth clouds of smoke. It was no longer a battle: it was a continuous
left to do as a Russian. Nothing remained for the representative of the
force of the wind is beyond the influence of the buds. I see only a

“My dear fellow,” Nesvítski whispered to Prince Andrew, “the old
Poland, and the reaction of 1820 and later) also flowed?
“Well, to mention only firewood and fodder, let me inform you. Why, when
But to the generals, especially the foreign ones in the Russian army,
rather moist and glittered more than usual, and as he sat in his saddle,
screams of those that were being trampled on and of those who tried to
were saying, ‘Ah, she’s not the one I’m after, so it’s not worth

sound of artillery fire near by. Having forced his way out of the crowd
“Master, not here—don’t understand... me, you...” said Gerásim, trying
of a pleasure, and obliges me to interrupt you. I am very sorry to leave
decided that the horses should be driven out into the woods and the
lady, and on horseback—raised the curiosity of the serfs to such a
Dron, whom the old prince called by the diminutive “Drónushka.”
especially requests for money to which, as an extremely wealthy man,
one of the lodges over the road purposely laden with snow.
into the Emperor’s study that the latter at once asked:
He did not allow himself either to be hard on or punish a man, or to
“Your excellency, should not Mary Bogdánovna be sent for?” said one
    * “A little bit in love with the young man.”

The Sokólniki field was deserted. Only at the end of it, in front of the
going: and besides—I am not Joan of Arc or an Amazon.”
“And is Papa older?” she asked.
person in a bed of roses with one crumpled petal suffered as keenly as
their seats, went up to “congratulate” the countess, and reached
bare feet a smile of animated self-satisfaction flitted across his face.
“Well, you know, I wanted to see...”
able to inflict punishments justly and unjustly. It is those people I
impassive on the face of a loved one who is dead, tapping the last on
thought, and her face suddenly became serious. But this lasted only a
probably to strengthen the front line. The smoke of the first shot had
so, and that they must stop this and the carts must be got ready.”
no difficulties daunted her. Thanks to her activity and energy, which
formed a star-shaped figure, scarcely swaying their bodies and with
those days, the absence of wine and cigars, his dirty unchanged linen,
sovereign and the criminal Bonaparte. Rostóv was therefore unpleasantly

the hollows the villages of Bezúbova and Zakhárino showed in the
Málo-Yaroslávets, but Kutúzov lingered with the main army and gave
himself, in very diverse circumstances, he repeatedly expressed his real
hundred? Eh?” he asked, turning to the assistant.
loving her; in deceiving yourself and her.” And he vividly recalled
Pierre saw that the count was much upset and tried to change the
they had made him drunk on champagne and Madeira, which he loved; and

belonging to that escort, but when they reached the supply stores they
added in a tone admitting of no rejoinder and raising her eyebrows.

d’affaires.
step that for you all is ended, all is closed except the drawing
hairdressing was almost done. Sónya was finishing dressing and so was
such a crime against his fellow man without comforting himself with
event. To us, the wish or objection of this or that French corporal to
care. My dear friend, Mademoiselle Bourienne, sends you kisses.

quickly. Prince Bagratión, uttering his words with an Oriental accent,
to attend to the business himself and so he disliked it and only tried
so long been deprived. And he suddenly turned from the cares of army
with him and he was looking at her with a lover’s eyes.
had been taken aback by her serious annoyance when on his first trip he
feel most painfully, I know him.” (It seemed to Napoleon that the chief

once he raised his eyebrows, abruptly touched his horse with his left
The other was that vague and quite Russian feeling of contempt for

While the Emperor had still been at Vílna, the forces had been divided
The prince had a list of things to be bought in Smolénsk and, walking
voice, “would you like to see little Nicholas? He is always talking


the Krémlin, but called on his friend Obolénski, who was fifteen and was
army, and the member of the Hofkriegsrath who had arrived the previous

steel, a delicate muzzle, and prominent black eyes. He had heard of
peculiarity of his speech was its directness and appositeness. It was
worse, and it is absolutely necessary to prepare him if he is so ill.
in its progress and tried to explain his own conception of it to her,
Pierre did not look out at the battlefield and was not concerned to know
“It will interest you,” said he.
all sides, moved across the bridge.
him. Half an hour later Prince Andrew was again called to Kutúzov.

will operate:

Count Golukhovski, who was bargaining for the horses Rostóv had betted
CHAPTER XIV
sensible and logical considerations showing it to be essential for him
No, it can’t be,” he told himself at every look, gesture, and word that

is a savage. You can tell a Parisian two leagues off. Paris is Talma, la


“O Lord, my Creator, Thou has heard our prayer...” said he in a
they were judging, what with one thing and another, filling in the
trampling through the deep snow, and muttering incoherent words:


this opinion, but as soon as he expressed it Karp and others attacked
The most cunning man could not have crept into her confidence more
and are no good to anyone.” She stood by her mother’s side and exchanged
the wheels go round; and till he has reached the ultimate cause of the

in chief with full powers over the armies and over the whole region
“Thank you very much, Prince,” answered one of the officers, pleased
to them was the chief cause of the liberal movement at the commencement
drive up, went to meet him.

to be late, and the huntsmen had not yet reached their places when Count
In front of him soldiers, probably Frenchmen, were running from right
support his opinions. He made use of every kind of mental device, except
“Lanciers du 6-me,” * replied Dólokhov, neither hastening nor slackening

Fëdorovna flushed, and drawing her kerchief over her face went laughing
our troops were known to him as far as they could be known to anyone


himself. Sónya told Pierre this as she led him along the corridor to



Can you fancy the figure he cut?...”
the princess’ sorrow and making herself a partner in it. She said her

because Napoleon had a cold, and that if he had not had a cold the
coursing. But when it is, then look out!” his appearance seemed to
Pierre knew all the details of the attempt on Bonaparte’s life in 1809

old prince had forbidden it, appeared on the threshold with a shawl

The visitor, not knowing what to say, shook her head.
me to inform you... But, don’t be uneasy,” he added, noticing that
the general pleasure and disappoint everyone’s expectation. Prince
“What’s the good of freedom to me, your excellency? We lived under the
perceive its plain and terrible meaning, these causes seem insufficient.
For a long time he could not utter a word, so that the Rhetor had to
pleasure that I am at the farm or in the office from morning to night?

she thought, “to tell Prince Andrew what has happened or to hide
Having ridden up the road, on both sides of which French talk could be

Since they are my foes they cannot be my friends, whatever may have been
and the consequent impossibility of a speedy emancipation.

was silenced at once. They looked at the beautiful, large, thoughtful
of carpenters hoping for high pay arrived in Moscow every day, and on
before. Others again spoke of the battle of Salamanca, which was
of him?” Not one of the innumerable speeches addressed to the Emperor

“The devil skin your Emperor.”
glanced round as if looking for something.
A cornet, hearing the story, informed his commander.
It was only at headquarters that there was depression, uneasiness, and

said little Iogel coming up to Nicholas. “Look how many charming young
finding pleasure in drawing out the human qualities of the embittered,
village and had already been sent for.
“Plenty of time, your excellency,” muttered Kutúzov in the midst of
a smile that broadened his round face more and more, prepared the
appeared in the doorway. The general with the bandaged head bent forward

departure they were dissatisfied with one another.

“you and your generals won’t get on against Buonaparte; you’ll

own life, for she was accustomed to seek other joys, but she understood
This spite increased still more when, on calling over the roll of
way rumors fly from Petersburg to Moscow, especially such false ones as


entering the French service. The captain was happy, the enchanting
“Certainly; but about Kutúzov, I don’t promise.”
Nicholas went to her, kissed her hand, and sitting down silently at her

“Go to Petersburg, that will be best. And I will write to you,” she

satisfied with the party. She replied in her usual simple manner that
enough for her to love and know she was beloved, she wanted now, at
another channel and express his own deeply felt idea for the sake of
sight. I suffer for my own sins,’ and he wept bitter tears. Well,
felt the impossibility of going to sleep on such a night. It was light
evil while men remain what they are, and also because wisdom needs no
service of Bonaparte, as we used to call him? Yet here I am in Moscow
a French sharpshooter hit him in the fleshy part of his leg. Perhaps at
Noticing him, an officer said: “The town is being abandoned. Get away,
“Ah, Sónya, if you only knew how happy I am!” cried Natásha.
frightened here?” and the artilleryman understood him.
“I am asking you when you last heard from Bolkónski,” repeated
as clear as day, and can go so far astray. That is the only thing
Natásha knew why he mentioned Mítya’s likeness to Nicholas: the
weakness which assailed him at this touching recollection.
would forget something that had just occurred, or take a false step with
The fog had grown so dense that though it was growing light they could
of humanity be regarded—as the result of the free, or as the result of
boat, and Rostopchín had said to them in French: “Rentrez en vous-mêmes;
my men in the wood. I beg of you, I beg of you,” he repeated, “to
were the cause of the Russian failures, it is still incomprehensible
guessing by the voice that it was not Konovnítsyn.
the valley. The fourth column, with which Kutúzov was, stood on the
before the portrait. At a single gesture from him everyone went out on
the endless variety of men’s minds, which prevents a truth from ever
it and he needs it. But someone else needs it still more. Who needs it
night he had not the slightest doubt, and the guiltlessness of
Certain destruction lay behind the French but in front there was hope.
Napoleon. It was plain to him that all these things were no business



necessary to go on insisting day after day and hour after hour, and even
front of them all fled the Emperor, then the kings, then the dukes. The
but select company, and why this would give him pleasure, and why though
of police. You think I won’t get to him? Robbery is not permitted to
him to go back as it was too dangerous to remain where they were.
having lost all motive and all sense of life. Drones, bumblebees, wasps,
asking.” But dying was also dreadful.
the cobblestones, and the brilliant, hot sunshine were all full of that
This campaign consisted in a flight of the French during which they did

experience of life had reached the conviction that thoughts and the

could not reply) and that according to my observation he is incapable of
were torn from the regiment in a minute and the slain were continually
gossip in drawing rooms of the club, from gossip to carousals and women;
Intriguer!” she hissed viciously, and tugged with all her might at the
Prince Bagratión rode an officer of the suite, the prince’s personal
“Good day, General!” said he. “I have received the letter you brought
“They killed him almost before my eyes.”
“Yes, yes,” answered Prince Andrew absently. “One thing I would do if
“Eh, books, books!” said another peasant, bringing out Prince Andrew’s

and to those of Monsieur de Jobert and their voices trembled. A dance,
expression and she sat silent. She sat a long time looking at the
with himself and those around him, his smile and glance were brighter
“Yes,” Pierre replied, and went on with what was in his mind. “Nicholas
had time to think of what lay before her.
“Come, that’s right, Count!” cried the staff captain, turning
“But see here, to tell the truth, Aunt...”
“Oh, she nearly knocked our gentleman’s hat off!” cried the red-faced

capacity of those who had chosen it. Others argued that a mistake had

at the spreading flames of the second fire in the distance.

face thrust out of the carriage window gazing at them, and respectfully

to answer it. “Dear Princess,” she wrote in French quickly and
future daughter-in-law to old Prince Bolkónski while he was in Moscow
However, at nine o’clock the prince, in his velvet coat with a sable

happy because she had someone to adore her: the adoration of others was
‘on the march’ it meant in greatcoats?” said he reproachfully to
And suddenly he saw vividly before him a long-forgotten, kindly old man
He touched his horse and having called Milorádovich, the commander of
Rostóv rode on at a footpace not knowing why or to whom he was now
equals, while his eyes occasionally sought out his fine well-set-up
men so painstakingly acquire and guard—if it has any worth has so only
to beg him to buy them, and long after his death the memory of his
is good to have a friend like the prince,” she said, smiling at Prince
things as impossible. The small bands that had started their activities
or Prince Andrew, of herself, of his grandson, or of his own death, and
“Well, is she pretty? Ah, friend—my pink one is delicious; her name is
of your brother-in-law having sought her hand, or something of that
Timókhin, who had not slept at all because of the pain in his leg, had

subsequently in 1813. His activity at that time was no less astounding
of the maids who was present. (Mary Bogdánovna was a midwife from the
opportunity of joining in the general current of recollections.
moving amid the rows of soldiers and of other vehicles, had to stop.
    CHAPTER VIII
of my youth, farewell!” he said, turning to Makárin and the others.
significantly at her husband) “I’m afraid, I’m afraid!” she
on strategics and tactics, contradict each other.
“Mary, you must despise me!” he would say. “I deserve it.”
    CHAPTER XIII
warmth when he was cold, of talking to a fellow man when he wished to
expected this.
Konovnítsyn, who listened in weary silence, reminded him that they must
    CHAPTER I
think of how many men would be missing tomorrow but ought not to speak



arrived.
little girl, was afraid of looking at her, and yet felt an irresistible
chiefly from the Emperor’s presence in the army with his military court
Not only did his reason not reproach him for what he had done, but
Dólokhov, after Anatole entered, had remained at the wicket gate and was

But the countess would not agree to his going; he had had a bad leg all
“‘Told them,’ I dare say!” said Alpátych. “Are they drinking?” he asked
“For the world of angels and all the spirits who dwell above us,” prayed
and said:
“If I’d been in Nikólenka’s place I would have killed even more

escape it anyhow.”
glittered brightly and its bells were ringing particularly clearly.

have to be sold, so that it was impossible to give it to Véra. Nor had
their service had lost more horses than the money he had from them would
just as the discovery of the laws of the motion of the planets was
“But a very kind man, Prince,” said Anna Mikháylovna with a
him...” different voices were saying.

On being relieved from picket duty Rostóv had managed to get a few
“At least, change your coiffure,” said the little princess.

listening to conversations, but nowhere finding any confirmation of the
inheritance together with the obligation to pay the debts.
the man to the world and the clearness of our perception of the place
and merry faces. Pelagéya Danílovna began to recognize the mummers,
glancing into the drawing room, where he saw Véra and his mother with
Still, I will take Borís and go to see him at once, and I shall speak
There was no one in the hall. “Oh God! Is everyone all right?”
change in her.
princess with a pleased smile, as to an intimate acquaintance.
nothing! I,’ he says, ‘did that deed, and I put the knife under your
confession; he felt himself in the presence of one socially a complete

put it in a carriage, and set off with it to visit some actresses! The
Vesénny (vernal) and into Vesénya by the peasants and soldiers. In both
“Wetched!” he muttered, throwing down a purse with some gold in it.


history. But to arrive at these laws, resulting from the sum of all
“What do you want?”
“Another petitioner,” answered the man with the braces.
at the officer’s handsome, self-satisfied face, and noting the eager
At the same time his mother-in-law, Prince Vasíli’s wife, sent to
The subject for history is not man’s will itself but our presentation of
as a child, there was no longer in her singing that comical, childish,
a tool, but also a judge of farming and an end in himself. At first
neighboring villages with Ilyín; he let Lavrúshka have another horse and

firmly resolved not to call on the Rostóvs again and to forget the whole
orders or for acting on their own initiative, for in battle what is at
deserved her reputation of being a very clever woman. Had she attempted
When her hair was done, Natásha, in her short petticoat from under
his love for him. The feeling of pain and fear he had experienced when

gladness.

twinkled and looked out straight.
Nicholas suddenly at supper. “She will really begin to arrange a
And Anatole and Dólokhov, when they had money, would give him a
breath, was returning to her seat when another dancer chose her. She was
“I think...” Pierre replied, “that he has nothing to forgive.... If I

By ten o’clock some twenty men had already been carried away from the
such distractions lasted only a moment, and for eight hours the men had
yet.... How like he is growing, Mary!” he added, addressing Countess
“you forever lose the chance of marrying the other, and you will
despised, but began to grow fond of, to respect, and to pity his

last time. And suddenly, in the most casual tone, which made him feel
commands dependent one on another. Napoleon could not have commanded
problems in higher mathematics, turning snuffboxes on a lathe, working
beside the bed. Pierre obediently sat down, his eyes asking if he were
his eyes from the plan of the building.
the table, beside her lay Anatole’s letter. Sónya picked it up and
for trees and gullies for men and continually discovering his mistakes.


“But you take it without sugar?” she said, smiling all the time, as if
On returning home in the evening he would jot down in his notebook four
matter, and to that I reply: ‘You are my best friend, as you know,
“What a darling that girl is!” thought he. “And what have I been
horizontal wrinkle between his brows, stood in civilian dress facing
against something. The Cossacks and Dólokhov galloped after Pétya into
listened. “I don’t know. A storm?” she ventured timidly, afraid of

unmask his deceivers!” And in order to realize vividly his love
justify the mistakes of a commander in chief who had to be represented
calculated to frighten Pierre.
mistakes in speaking French. With her he behaved with special care and

thought independent of her sister-in-law’s words. In the midst of a

the prince, who was in his large study. From the far side of the house
cordial tone suddenly seemed very strange to Natásha.
understood differently, yet looking at Sónya she agreed with Natásha’s
to the back of the house, to the room of the eldest princess.
had a preliminary talk about the reception of a new Brother. They laid
letter and to let me know how he looks at the whole matter and whether
where the clavichord stood.
Anatole smiled. The expression of that base and cringing smile, which
Contrary to the Emperor’s wish Kutúzov detained the greater part of the
now ordered the people to catch all spies and bring them to him, and now
Kutúzov with his eagle nose and puffy face appeared in the doorway.
At other times she praised Julie to him and advised him to go to
him so when I see him!”
He knew no one, and despite his smart Guardsman’s uniform, all these


The uninterested and perplexed faces of the marshals showed that they
Now to his surprise he found that he no longer felt either doubt or
Europe would in this way soon have been, in fact, but one people, and
was too long.
“I don’t know how to answer your question,” he said, blushing
prince had replied affectionately, and from that time had kept the
Soon after the migration to the “warm rivers,” in which he had taken
to build a new chantry to the church at their own expense in honor
The wagons that had reached the hussars had been consigned to an
“Mercy on us! Your excellency!” answered Alpátych, immediately
the time seemed merely strange to Pierre: he felt he could not grasp its
who came from the field of battle, and of those who stood around him,
deserving of sympathy and less the result of free will. The founder of a

with evident pleasure.
In the count’s room, which was full of tobacco smoke, they talked
die.”
pause, again rising and again pacing the room, “tomorrow you must get
exhales from a flower. He could not understand the value or significance
pay homage to her. Napoleon Bonaparte was despised by all as long as he
not that which can convince me, dear friend—life and death are what
the Emperor immediately!” thought Rostóv and galloped on.
and tormented her but she was in absolute need of it. As soon as anyone
“No, I meant to ask...” Pierre began, but Prince Andrew interrupted
examined it the day after it was committed. And in the same way every
and coiffure, and admired the beauty of the shoulders and the pearls.
attendants and singers. Behind them soldiers and officers bore a large,
“That’s not the way, that’s not the way, Sónya!” cried Natásha
you expect me to sacrifice my feelings and my honor for the sake of
cloudless, northern, summer night. Pierre took an open cab intending

stubble land and bushes touched with green here and there, and into a
“Piti-piti-piti and ti-ti and piti-piti-piti boom!” flopped the fly....
and without his sovereign’s assent, that the Emperor Alexander did not
him or her to a little old lady, wearing large bows of ribbon in her
staying the whole evening, I hope?”

that dinner was ready! The door opened, and from the dining room came
Borís did not finish, for at that moment Kaysárov, Kutúzov’s adjutant,

“Lord God of might, God of our salvation! Look this day in mercy and
fetch the Frenchman, Moreau,” he said, alluding to the invitation made
rising full moon, and that vast red ball swayed strangely in the gray
when killing Napoleon. “Well then, take me and execute me!” he went on,
been sent about with counterorders—when it had become plain that the
wood, should turn the Russian left flank. This could not be done and
terminated by peace.
But Napoleon nodded to the traveler, and de Beausset had to mount. When
Hélène turned to Pierre with the beautiful bright smile that she gave


She had fallen ill unexpectedly a few days previously, had missed
“Where are all the folks going?”
a superior officer perhaps. You have borne arms against us. That’s not
Your Sónya
This ideal of glory and grandeur—which consists not merely in
staff,” replied Prince Andrew with a smile which Kutúzov noticed.
herself, her face was pale. It was he. She knew this for certain, though
Prince Andrew as past him—and said, with a laugh: “That must have been a
rest, and then...”
fight. You’ll see—we shall retire.”
accompanied them, formed for two months the subject of inexhaustible
with an enormous mouth, hardly refraining from laughing, “I felt like
Had Napoleon not ridden out on the evening of the twenty-fourth to the
than eighteen thousand.”
princess never saw the beautiful expression of her own eyes—the look

and salt of hospitality, as, according to his understanding of his
atrocity for which a “great” man can be blamed.

“Hasn’t been in since the evening. Must have been losing,”
principles in harmony with the spirit of the times, undertake the

shouts of hurrah, and saw wounded being brought back (there were not
excitement.
hearers—who like himself had often heard stories of attacks and had
chaffingly, but without getting angry.
a regimental but a Cossack horse. A judge of horses and a sportsman,
Tsarévich, who could not forget his disillusionment at Austerlitz, where
“I never invited them. They came to disturb my life—and there is not
and being well disposed toward Borís, who had managed to please him the
smiled at him with the egotism of joy.
was pierced beyond Valúevo by the Smolénsk highroad crowded with troops.
head thrown awkwardly back and his shako off.
afraid of grieving either.
talking as now, Nicholas did not leave Sónya’s side, and gazed at her
brother-in-law, Nicholas tried to hide his wretched condition from him.
to his surprise, Balashëv received, through Duroc, an invitation to dine

particles of drizzling mist. The bare twigs in the garden were hung with
Stone Bridge, were Ney’s troops and transport.

1807, came to see him. Willarski was married to a Russian heiress who
wheels and pulleys is merely a slow and regular movement of the
dance? Is it possible that not one of all these men will notice me?
in cold water, was all aglow, and his eyes were particularly brilliant.
I always stick to mother truth. It’s not right!”

Mary Bolkónskaya.”
and handing on to posterity of a certain important mystery... which
flèches) to lead his division through the woods, Napoleon agreed, though
in these difficult circumstances. The Empress Márya, concerned for

which intellectual knowledge is divided. The highest wisdom is one.
in her eyes and her lips curved with a strange smile.
should make peace after all our sacrifices and such insane retreats! You
“You haven’t read the letter?” asked Sónya.
than a hundred cannon were already in the hands of the French.
that her children were being ruined, that it was not the count’s fault


center of the table, Prince Vasíli attracted everybody’s attention.
completely, and, leaving the room without crying, went silently up
“Well, what then?”
nothing to her about his love. Before he left he had a long talk with
As Pierre passed through the fence gate, he was enveloped by hot air and
depended on whether he was, or was not, in time to lock it. He went, and

taking his partner with him. He glided silently on one foot half across
became an empire and French armies went to Russia at the will of one
frantically, had such an effect that they managed to squeeze through

Balashëv respectfully ventured to disagree with the French Emperor.
arson (which is very doubtful, for no one had any reason to burn the
and do not, desire war, that I have waged war only against the false

CHAPTER XXI
artless smile, she had met him in secluded passages.
“We may as well go back,” said the son in French.
must seem to be a genius. And it must appear an astonishing conjunction
the landing below, Philip, the footman, stood looking scared and holding
been bewildered. At that time, the Russians were so used to victories
forbidden by his law.”
dispute with the French grenadier. They were naturally talking about the
father’s letter, he returned to the nursery.
    BOOK TEN: 1812
is most strongly felt on a bright, hot day in town. All the Moscow
CHAPTER I
irritated Prince Andrew, he knew not why. He was unpleasantly
move.
    CHAPTER XVI
to get himself killed. Tell me what this wretched war is for?” she

import of an event that is occurring. Moment by moment the event is
“What is it, my dear? Come, let’s sit down here,” said she.
History examines the manifestations of man’s free will in connection
same?”
my dear boy, among other things you are too attentive to the other, the
Wishing to find out where the commander in chief was, he rode up to
“You have observed that?” said Princess Mary.
countess could not conceive of existence remained unchanged. There was
“If anyone comes meddling again,” said he, emitting the words
“Come, dear princess,” said Mademoiselle Bourienne, “just one more
Alpátych, his coachman, Ferapóntov’s wife and children and the house
as long as I live.”
which he had not till then been aware).
prepared.
have frightened you—sit down and tell me all the news.”
The countess took Princess Mary into the drawing room, where Sónya was
inculpate him. And so, as they had the power and wish to inculpate
in order to hide our shame. We have paid for the right to look at the


present or not, lispingly expressed his views, which were sometimes not
as her aunt mentioned Andrew. Evidently she could speak of Russia’s

Meanwhile another column was to have attacked the French from the front,

raised his saber and struck the Frenchman with it.
“I am not talking about you,” he said, “I don’t know you and,

motionless masses of the French now swayed and that there really was

“How’s it you’re not drunk today?” said Nesvítski when the
anxious to be presented to Prince Nicholas Bolkónski, and had contrived
and Horse Guards’ jacket, shouting something to a pale, white
his son and seizing the little princess’ arm as if she would have run
behind the scenes something metallic was struck three times and

service to Denísov. He knew his stubborn will and straightforward hasty
could see, beside the wooden fence, a row of thirty-year-old birches
Mary. The countess did not sleep at night, or when she did fall asleep

strange to them but on the contrary it seemed the only thing that could





of which he was unable to judge.

CHAPTER IV

remembered her conversation at the window, and with an expression of
fancy he did not clearly picture to himself either the striking of the

that destroyed Napoleon’s army, is impossible.
where his tea was handed to him; Mílka, the old gray borzoi bitch

“Please be quick,” he said.
She sat awhile, wondering what the meaning of it all having happened
The general’s face clouded, his lips quivered and trembled. He took
“No, you have not understood me, don’t let us talk about it,” she
on the shoulder, and then went up to the table where Prince Andrew,
“Yes, immediately, immediately! Hey, who’s there?” he called out
and Madame Kwüdener, and wead Ecka’tshausen and the bwethwen. Oh, they
sachiez que c’est une femme,” * said Prince Andrew to Pierre.
can’t... that’s all....”
“For caustique—I am guilty and will pay, and I am prepared to pay again


his private room and, calling his adjutant, asked for some papers

“Well, good night, Mary!” said Natásha. “Do you know, I am often afraid
deliberately.
silence.
you, all!” he added in a tone of command.
and quiet comment on the advantage or disadvantage of Bennigsen’s
readiness for relentless hatred in case of such refusal.
Pierre hurriedly.
and baking bread with rolled-up sleeves, and cooking; or frightening,
heavy chains. Princess Mary was particularly fond of her. Once, when in
Next came four soldiers, carrying something heavy on a cloak, and passed

“Mávra, quicker, darling!”
chief, your excellency?” said Rostóv, with his hand to his cap.
mistakes, on craft, or on the weakness of a diplomatist, a ruler, or a
footpace to the place where the whips were getting the hounds together.
“Go!” he cried, twisting the reins round his hands, and the troyka tore
“Eh? Don’t talk nonsense!” said a sergeant major.
“Why shouldn’t you go away, your excellency? You can go,” said Dron.
him. Now a smile at the joy of life always played round his lips, and
Pierre knew very well what a hieroglyph was, but dared not speak. He

Denísov’s affairs, Rostóv rode to Tilsit with the letter to the
“Yes, yes,” he muttered, “it will be difficult, I fear, difficult
Speaking of the interaction of heat and electricity and of atoms, we
of blunders. “The more mistakes that are made the better. It will at any
had done her utmost to make him love her husband as she loved him, and
holding his thumb extended, drew his long hair from under his dalmatic
take the money,” and he threw the purse to him and ran out of the inn.
in reply to Balashëv’s bow. “Let him have mine, he has a long way to
Kutúzov, where he inquired for Bolkónski, all the adjutants and even
we must keep some force to reach the frontier with, and that he would
the respect the guards showed him—entered the coach house where the
“It is not too late yet, your Highness—the enemy has not gone away—if
fence they all spread out evenly and quietly, without noise or talk,
It was so light that he could see the moonlight reflected from the metal
this man and that man, did not execute such and such maneuvers....
Beside himself with terror Pierre jumped up and ran back to the battery,
ill and could not walk, the officer replied that the order was to shoot
ball, cleaving the air, flew over the heads of Bagratión and his suite,
Prince Vasíli’s face so out of keeping with his dignity that Pierre
Narýshkin, Uvárov, Dolgorúkov, Apráksin, Valúev, to the committee,
“An ukáse, they are reading an ukáse! Reading an ukáse!” cried voices in


Several men joined the first two.
till you can say to yourself that you have done all you are capable of,

with problems of motion admits the conception of the infinitely small,
into a doze.
“Oh, what a pig I am, not to have written and to have given them

verses in the bosom of her dress close to her bony little chest, ran
dogs appeared out of the mist, approaching the Rostóvs. In front rode a
The eyes of the general and the soldier met. The general became silent,
The sounds of crackling and the din of falling walls and ceilings, the
yet at the same time only a part of a whole too immense for man to
perception befitting a man of the world, he indicated by a movement of
question he knew was in his wife’s mind.
man of the ages past or future.”
he was sent away. Hippolyte is her brother... Prince Vasíli is her
in the hair, the hair combed up, and the blue scarf arranged lower on
She has a brother; I think you know him, he married Lise Meinen lately.

that end and when did this new, terrible state of things begin? What
as the chief market days and to that end a sufficient number of troops

Alexander’s eyes. Alexander listened attentively to what was said to
for these simple, kindly people.
that?... Kindly do as you are ordered.”
from Dron, Alpátych contented himself with that, though he not only
The sixth party, the Bennigsenites, said, on the contrary, that at any
“Only fancy!” answered Ignát, surprised at the broadening grin on his
as his own. What also conduced to Bagratión’s being selected as
“The people are still hoping to see Your Majesty again.”
Mávra Kuzmínichna, who stood talking compassionately to the officer.
“Be off, thou base slave! Touch me not! See this?” shouted Makár
sleek cavalry passed, before a carriage drawn by six gray horses rattled
“Well, she loves me and you like that.”
to press so painfully on her heart, it gradually faded into the past,
evening before, had greatly increased during the night. Moscow was on
conscious of this unseen line, and the question whether they would cross
the attention of all the superior officers, the militiamen and soldiers
the familiar staircase. The well-known old door handle, which always
And Denísov went to the bed to get the purse from under the pillow.
have it, young man, I’m going.”
Pierre went into that gloomy study which he had entered with such
body with the sheet as he huddled up on his bench.


seen in its entirety when it had been accomplished and belonged to the


of the sayings and doings of their commander, the Grand Duke, and told
censure, but asked him not to be too hard on the poor old man. “What

here that men are needed. Advisers are always plentiful, but men are
prince was about to say something, but Hélène interrupted him.
“Do you understand what you’re saying?” he said in a trembling
Rostóvs’, but did not behave to Natásha as an affianced lover: he
unable to ask for himself, he became chary of using his influence. But
while carts were passing out of the gate. Pierre turned away with
badly....”

“I?... I’m going to Petersburg,” answered Pierre, in a childlike,
peasants, and women in cloaks and in pelisses—was so eagerly centered on
guard. Ill with fever he went to Smolénsk with twenty thousand men

till the general asked him to restore it. All his absent-mindedness and
While in the Rostóvs’ ballroom the sixth anglaise was being danced,

“Is it possible that he died in the bitter frame of mind he was then in?
was required of him, but when they told him to bless the boy, he did
columns, their bayonets glittering, were moving continuously in one
repeat them personally to Napoleon.

revelry in the tavern and supposing it to have been broken into, wished
she saw before her his smooth handsome forehead, his mustache, and his
any action, as it was not clear to him now what he ought to do. He had
stake is what is dearest to man—his own life—and it sometimes seems that
He paused, and just as he was about to say something more, another ball


conceivable occurrences, and declare this abstraction to be the aim of

bridges to the other side.
him into Russia, and we should not go to fight in Austria and Prussia
quietly and humorously how he had known that doll Mimi when she was
him as a member he did not find a single one. There were many dead whom
sound of these voices, the inattentive way Kozlóvski looked at him, the

struck two and another with a shrill tone joined in from the drawing
The motives of those who thronged from all sides to Moscow after it had

from the highest quarters a confirmation of what they wanted to believe,
inaudible, voice.

imagining himself before his own officers, insisted on his soldierly
they had gone by, the same stream of soldiers followed, with the same
righteousness of the prayer that was being read on bended knees. She

everyone adopted toward him the tone of men who know something others do

from the forest that skirted the highroad a large French convoy of
made with sugar.
expedition against England (which would inevitably have ruined him) he

chivalry, of flags of truce, of mercy to the unfortunate and so on. It’s
Rostóv was always thinking about that brilliant exploit of his, which to
Besides the plunderers, very various people, some drawn by curiosity,
property. ‘And he went on to tell them all about it in due order. ‘I
door opened quickly and the stern figure of the old man in the white

them it was difficult to get out again. One was shouting, “Get on!
imagined that they were accomplishing a most noble and honorable
she had feared, order her to be carried away by force but only told her
anything?” said he, as if it was ridiculous, in his presence, to be the
doings of a few dozen men in a building in the city of Paris, calling
Having gone nearly three miles he at last met an acquaintance and
“Well, do you think I shall prevent her, that I can’t part from
are wrapped up in you, and that in spite of the distance separating us


suggested—on the plea that it was necessary for the sovereign to arouse

have been even less reason to expect a disturbance among the people

real strength of the colony, still exists; and similarly, though in
Mack’s arrival... What’s the matter, Rostóv? You look as if you’d
with none of the embarrassment so commonly shown by young men in their
“On the contrary, that coiffure suits the princess very well,” said
legs, and that is the door, but why is it always stretching and drawing
campaigns, and battles, now reflected the restless movement by political
encountering the old prince, of whom he was afraid. He did not mention
earlier still?... When, when was this terrible affair decided? Moscow
“Mamma, it’s impossible: see what is going on in the yard!” she cried.
bits he turned and went out.
The floor of the stage consisted of smooth boards, at the sides was
‘How well Anísya carried herself, how well!’” And Nicholas heard
“He gave me no instructions. I think I could?” he returned, inquiringly.
“That’s right, young countess, that’s it, come on! I never saw

“I am a fool, a fool! what have I been waiting for?” thought
“Sit down, Natásha; perhaps you’ll see him,” said Sónya.
matter acquired a large sum of money which was at that moment in his
her, to restrain themselves for this once precious being formerly as
“Reinforcements!” thought Napoleon to himself. “How can they need
that village, amid the smoke, was something resembling a battery, but it
playing with the subject. Electricity produces heat, heat produces
he fell ill. She was terrified by his illness, and yet that was just
help me to tear from myself these dogs—my passions especially the
Nicholas’ prayer, was prompted by this: the thought of getting Nicholas
there was such peace all around, such blessedness, that one don’t want

soon as revolutions, conquests, or civil wars occur—that is, as soon as
“Yes, Father, I have come to you and brought my wife who is
CHAPTER XIV
lump of flesh. Come along, Pierre!”
de cochon (pig’s lemonade), and Morel spoke well of the limonade de
“But anything suits you, my charmer!” she remarked.

“The cavalry ride to battle and meet the wounded and do not for a moment
that you are not one of those who on pretense of saving mankind wish to
battle and, in spite of the remonstrances of his courtiers, at twelve

a ceremonial march past him, and Rostóv on Bedouin, recently purchased
day... Natásha, what have I done to deserve it?...”
marshal had been found in his possession.
declared, was extraordinary and had achieved miracles of valor. The
Alpátych looked intently at Dron and frowned. Just as Dron was a model
better and roomier part of Andrew Savostyánov’s hut. The men, women, and
infected with the merrily excited mood that goes with the commencement
Having disentangled his leg, he rose. “Where, on which side, was now
though they were on springs.
that he and Uncle Pierre, wearing helmets such as were depicted in
I was quite little that used to be so with me. Do you remember when
forces had been similarly drawn. On the twelfth of June, 1812, the
From that day the eldest princess quite changed toward Pierre and began
destruction. What would have happened had Moscow not burned down? If


under certain conditions.
much at the captain as at those who were laughing, among whom Zherkóv
learned historian, who does not throw his little stone at Alexander for
his family and entering into all the details of his children’s relations
real truth I’m telling you, I saw it myself. So he was brought, quite

the staff captain.

woman! Where has she run off to? And how am I to find the nearest way

George—I won’t know you! My husband is away in Tver or I would send
engaged; he was shouting “Hurrah!”
it was long before their conversation could settle on anything. They

He was somewhat flushed with the wine and the drive. His eyes were
Friday. When he awoke on the Thursday, Savélich came to ask him about
official appointed to the province in which the prince’s estate lay
wished to see the regiment just in the state in which it had been on


honest, that’s the chief thing. I’ll be sure to send it to you. Or
The count turned and saw on his right Mítka staring at him with eyes
Prince Vasíli saw that Pierre knew this. He suddenly muttered
not been summoned for the purpose, and though it was not so called, they
blind, straight to her, and he goes up to her and falls down and says,
Austrian, to report and explain, and to his headquarters where he had
the better. But Bogdánich, without looking at or recognizing Rostóv,
them off: we can hardly do it. But theirs,’ he says, ‘are white as paper
dull without you,” said she, giving him a tender smile.
time longed with all his heart to establish a republic in Russia;
The Emperor with a rapid glance scanned Kutúzov from head to foot,
the contradictory replies, not meeting the questions, which all the

“And you, Michael Nikanórovich?” he said, addressing “Uncle.”
After Métivier’s departure the old prince called his daughter in, and
began to prepare for their night’s rest. They all appeared angry and
to you on my honor that Napoleon was in such a fix as never before and
withdraw, respectfully pressed close to the doorpost with bowed head.
Mikháylovna, or you will not hold out.”
“Hm...” said the count, and stopped.

here’s another admirer of that powder-monkey emperor of yours,” he
indicating a captive French dragoon who was being brought in on foot by

singing, and solemnly and jerkily flourished above their heads his white
Prince Vasíli, who of late very often forgot what he had said and
more one-sided in the dispute. They were Russians: Bagratión, Ermólov
the most disadvantageous and dangerous path, where the old scent was
“Yes, yes, that is really true,” Pierre hastily interrupted her.
guns, that had not ceased for ten hours, wearied the ear and gave
ground ten paces apart to mark the barrier. It was thawing and misty; at
don’t care a straw about anyone but those I love; but those I love,
conscious of. “The vibration of my left calf is a great sign with me,”

added quickly, glancing at Natásha and noticing on her face curiosity as
Neither her father, nor her mother, nor Sónya, nor Prince Andrew
the first time. Sometimes that same look fell on Pierre, and that funny
general historian looks for the cause of the event not in the power
had played a little air with variations on the harp, she joined the

mouth. Another was walking sturdily by himself but without his musket,
“Somebody has come.”
was now replaced by another, especially since he had seen that soldier
hard to find some occupation the more easily to bear the danger. To
“No, I think I’ll go home.”
“I met them the day before yesterday at the Arkhárovs’. Natalie has
admired their cleverly contrived costumes, and particularly how they
rolled softly over the straw beneath the windows, Anna Mikháylovna,
Outside, there was the same cold stillness and the same moon, but even
known them a long time,” said Princess Mary. “Tell me honestly
CHAPTER IX
this condition of stupor since the morning, when Sónya, to the surprise
“Oh yes, I understand,” said the governor’s wife.
And in fact the head in the nightcap was lifted at once. On

the hill.
“Yákov Alpátych, discharge me! Take the keys from me and discharge me,
and scanty beards emerged from the tavern, smiling, staggering, and
what he said and would have passed on, but Chernýshev introduced him to
done, I have done; but, if you like, I won’t speak to him again.”
violence to the inhabitants or any looting, and announcing a roll call
B., and only remembered that I ought not to have done so when everybody
Prince Andrew had spent two years continuously in the country.
historical events, that is, as not subject to laws, is the same for

public to appreciate his skill.
adjutants whom he knew. The adjutant looked angrily at him, evidently

ladies and all these civilities!” said he aloud in Sónya’s presence,
event.




aggrandizement antinational. I should have associated my son in the
in his voice a sincerity and weakness Pierre had never observed in it
The carpets yielded and the lid closed; Natásha, clapping her hands,
that the Ismáylov regiment was quartered for the night ten miles from
comrades in destiny, as he pitied himself.
A footman came in to summon Borís—the princess was going. Pierre, in

damned fool!” cried Denísov, not pronouncing his r’s. “Such ill
them.
in future note down all my actions.
remember Nikólenka too, I remember him well,” she said. “But I
two people. They were the yard porter Ignát, and the page boy Míshka,

fine young daredevil of an hussar married and settled down. Among these
Rostóv’s relations with the Polish girl might be, began to upbraid
the old man—the cause of their losses (if they were losses)—now
a man no longer young, with snow white hair and brilliant black eyes,
when he came to his senses. Balashëv stood with downcast eyes, looking
death, and Prince Andrew died.
essential connection of historical persons with the masses.
Morand’s and Gérard’s divisions (for whose movements no directions are
several other trains of vehicles similar to the Rostóvs’, and as they
she said with the facility in lying natural to a society woman. “We were
“Oh, yes!” said Pierre.
would be an insult to her and to her father’s memory. Assuming that she
winter of 1806, which Nicholas Rostóv spent in Moscow, was one of the
from those parts and knew the country well. His plan seemed decidedly
Rostopchín now knew it.
“Count! One God is above us both!”—Vereshchágin’s words suddenly
motionless with outstretched arms.

and ministers and propounding the historians’ own reflections concerning
except to Pierre and Hélène, whose presence he seemed not to notice.

year. And I wished to tell you of that,” said Prince Andrew.
“How can you judge what’s best?” he cried, the blood suddenly
They all stood despondent and silent. The tall youth moved his lips and
pocket and that’s quite simple and is no one else’s business.”

horse fell in among the hussars. Nearly all the French dragoons were
If the consciousness of freedom were not a separate and independent

But Rostóv did not reply.

“No, my love; I am frightened myself,” answered her mother. “Now
The commander of the regiment was an elderly, choleric, stout, and
constant composure and complacency and lack of all interests or desires,
if you still try to defend the infamies and horrors perpetrated by that

a future seemed to them to insult his memory. Still more carefully did
Crossing a road they descended a steep incline and saw several men
experienced for a long time—that of hundreds of eyes looking at
“And I’d have won on my Frenchy, your excellency,” said Lavrúshka
not a diplomatist. That’s why I joined the hussars, thinking that here

confusion and obscurity would result from such an account of the duel.
been inactive, without food, in constant fear of death, and their pale
service he had run over pedestrians and upset vehicles in the streets
“in for a penny, in for a pound—who cares?” spirit, and the inevitable
as an equal.

want to, but now I have no time.” Besides, it seemed to him that the
She invited them to take the wounded man into the house.
each side of the open door and the carriage steps waiting to help the
power. During the hour Pierre watched them they all came flowing from
was only interested in the affair with the commissariat officers. On
Natásha listened with concentrated attention, trying but failing to
me?” She concluded from his tone that he was vexed with her and wished
performed at a certain moment in time becomes irrevocable and belongs to
in front, who had seen and heard what had taken place before them, all
had an opportunity of getting a good look at him, for Pfuel arrived soon
and social tact,” thought he; “been proud of my house, in which she


“And Alpátych is being sent to Smolénsk?” asked Princess Mary.
and least of all on position.”
The peasants, adjusting the stretcher to their shoulders, started
hair above his broad forehead which reminded one of a lion, and the deep


referred to as a renegade French subject), Michaud, Toll, Count Stein
CHAPTER XIII
effected the dangerous crossing of the Straits of Dover and captured
dressing for his ride, and wore a blue uniform, opening in front over
“Yes, I do,” said Pierre. “But what was that you said: Frola and Lavra?”

The hussar took the cup.
that was swaying from its weight in Prince Andrew’s hands, but he
“You are not taking me unawares, you know,” said he. “As a true friend,
And how has it ended? I was against this marriage even then and foretold
yard. Two of them had been uncorded and a wounded officer was climbing
impatience, while the princess jumped up and with a gesture of
She was expecting Prince Andrew any moment and twice that day sent a
Sitting on the sofa with the little cushions on its arms, in what used
rooms with him to show him where to set up the bed for that night.
Fabvier’s account, as if he had not expected that matters could go
charming that only a fool would renounce such happiness.”
Petersburg simultaneously with the Emperor’s return—was ridiculed

Princess Mary nodded her head, weeping.


That’s it, come on! Nothing will remain. Then why harm anyone?”


said to her mother, who conscious that they had been on the brink of
Next day the field marshal gave a dinner and ball which the Emperor
killed the other merchant. ‘Where did it happen, Daddy?’ he said. ‘When,
collar to look like a grown-up man. He frowned before his looking glass,
Natásha had made a strong impression on Kurágin. At supper after
And the sergeant, taking one of the men by the shoulders, gave him a

to Borodinó (he could not have seen that position because it did not
“But it can’t be he, alone in the midst of this empty field!”
Anatole returned and looked at Dólokhov, trying to give him his

“What are you shoving for, young lordling? Don’t you see we’re all
to pass. The Uhlans started, the streamers on their spears fluttering,
CHAPTER X
against his wishes, could only be arranged at Otrádnoe.
between the person commanding and those who execute his command.
hawkers, the light and gay summer clothes of the crowd, the dusty leaves
any defeats, we owe this entirely to Barclay. If Barclay is now to

Anna Mikháylovna turned up her eyes, and profound sadness was depicted
Rostóv.
“Ah yes, my dear,” said the count, addressing the visitor and
direct descent and ascent to the brook separating us from Schön

the count. It is amazing how his Serene Highness could so foresee the
another for their lack of confidence.

Those eyes, filled with happy tears, gazed at him timidly,
Guards, wearing a cocked hat with its peaks front and back, with his

we to continue firing?” he asked.
had persisted in his request to Kutúzov, arrived at Grunth and reported
falling asleep, but suddenly, almost with the distinctness of reality,
minister’s bent bald head with its gray temples. He went on reading

Bonaparte, having come up at a gallop, stopped his horse.

princess rose. “It’s now two o’clock and you dine at four. There
them, and reads those from the Emperor addressed to others. ‘Ah! So
French. A group of Cossack scouts retired down the hill at a trot. All
Two days later, on the fifteenth of July, an immense number of carriages

to me?...”
The letter taken by Balashëv was the last Napoleon sent to Alexander.
where they were now being taken and how far they would get that day. An
the Guards he went with firm quick steps to the reception room.

eyes she was frightened, realizing that there was not that barrier of
of Police. “What a fine, good-looking officer and how kind. Fancy
Is the movement of the Russian people eastward to Kazán and Siberia
grew weary waiting to be relieved. Prince Andrew halted to have a look
over. It will be a tremendous banquet.”

it seemed to Pierre that he grew embarrassed. Pierre himself grew still
Amid the smoke, deafened by the incessant reports which always made him
the folding bedstead of Bennigsen’s adjutant. This adjutant was also
pathetic, kindly old man much to be pitied.

about her and looking at her. She realized that those noticing her liked
things that can be bought but think what being left behind means to
“There’s someone else we know—Bolkónski, do you see, Mamma?”
them taking off his cap) “from his animal condition and awaken in him
“I will, your excellency,” said Timókhin, showing by his smile that
French, and that he had exposed himself to terrible and obvious danger
bugler, showed one common expression of conflict, irritation, and
bothering about such trifles now! And they actually say he is not honest

heard around the campfires, Dólokhov turned into the courtyard of the
sick man had been laid in a stately pose in keeping with the ceremony
to say, have now assembled in council. No one knows what is coming. But
have been applied word for word to himself in relation to his wife.
could the architect Michael Ivánovich, who on being sent for came in
door behind him and satisfied himself that there was nobody else in the


The commander in chief is expected and you leave your place? Eh? I’ll

to us, though already questionably, to be the outcome of their heroes’
upside down and placed a nibbled bit of sugar beside it, and sat
genius.
Pierre listened to her with lips parted and eyes fixed upon her full of
officers were counting the men, poking the last man in each section in
giving him full liberty to remain with him during the battle or to join
he remembered the words the Emperor Alexander had not written in his
“I think,” said the prince with a smile, “that if you had been
from her. Karágina had replied that for her part she was agreeable, and
oppressed by the fact that the mood of everyone around her was so far
blindfolded) questioned him as to who he was, when and where he was
squeaky and unsteady voice, raising himself at the other side of the
aide-de-camp.

was feeling. Prince Andrew answered all his questions reluctantly but
only a slight blush suffused her cheeks and her eyes lit up with a new

the bridge, for the horizon as seen from the valley through which the
which, in accord with the club custom, he had given up to the hall
stopped her in the middle of the room and, amid general silence, said
right—serve him. Nicholas Bolkónski’s son need not serve under
He pointed with a smile to a turreted nunnery, and his eyes narrowed and
in perplexity. “But no, he has preferred to surround himself with
be accepted. He was told that it would not, and without waiting for the

and happiness the victory had afforded him had been now left in the
had apparently been running), “and I did so wish to have another talk

Yákov Alpátych heard without heeding. He asked for a samovar and for hay
the act of falling asleep. Rostóv lifted his head that had sunk almost
something I have received from the chancellor. I asked him for you, and
wish to negotiate.
it to its destination and make use of it.
“Marriages are made in heaven,” replied the elderly lady.
changing the expression of her eyes. “I am a woman, and you think we

of slaves? Have you helped them physically and morally? No! You have
“Ah, Wostóv,” he cried noticing the cadet’s bright face,

got up and went with the soldiers. They took him to the upper end of the
follows that Pierre will not be Pierre but will become Count Bezúkhov,
Freemasons. He felt like a man who after straining his eyes to see into
carefully, surprised at its thinness, and in the morning noticed her


thee, and even in those blasphemous words thou hast just uttered!”
A beatific smile of regret, repentance, and ecstasy beamed on M. de

this fact ought to give Prince Vasíli much satisfaction.
downward slope, lay a field of spring rye. To the right, beyond a steep
“The auditor wrote out a petition for you,” continued Túshin,
(1) However we may increase our knowledge of the conditions of space
listen!” said Natásha, with momentary vexation.
Everything within and around him seemed confused, senseless, and
event—the abandonment and burning of Moscow—and tried with his puny hand
the cutting and there it was cold and damp, but above Pierre’s head was

Coming out onto a field under the enemy’s fire, this brave general went
old lady next to her and glanced angrily at her daughter, and her sigh
was required of her. She was ready to sacrifice everything for her
In chapter 13, verse 18, of the Apocalypse, it is said:

were already up and astir. The smoke of the campfires, into which they
    * “Europe will never be our sincere ally.”
marry an heiress and choosing the dowerless Sónya. On this occasion, he
under any external impulse as people in the full vigor of life do,

throw up everything and fly to you, to press you forever to my ardent
hundred thousand strong reached Krásnoe with only fifty thousand.
We seized the children. But not Katie! Ooh! O Lord!...” and again she


     * “Forty thousand men massacred and the army of our allies
Formerly, after he had given two or three orders and uttered a
Again he glanced at her, and that glance convinced her that she was not
and dissatisfied about something and that at headquarters they were
was right.
sleep at night. Come now, where has this great commander of yours shown
for his ride.
“Do you remember him?” Natásha suddenly asked, after a moment’s
his approval, that is, to the accomplished fact.
seemed to awake as from a dream. He ordered the militiamen to be called

Princess Mary was in Moscow. The death, sufferings, and last days of
“I know, I know,” answered Prince Vasíli in his monotonous voice.

After washing and dressing, Prince Andrew came into the diplomat’s
to apply to you...”
Milorádovich too was away, but here he was told that he had gone to a
liberty. He was alone in a strange town, without acquaintances. No one
People were anxiously roaming about the streets.
    CHAPTER XII
“Dieu! Mon Dieu!” muttered Anna Pávlovna in a terrified whisper.
“Oh, how nice, how splendid!” she said to everything.
must certainly come. If you love somebody, my charmer, that is not a
the affairs in Spain.
CHAPTER XI

Nesvítski looked round and saw, some fifteen paces away but separated
Suddenly she jumped up onto a tub to be higher than he, embraced him so

fellows have all lost your wits, or I have outlived mine. May God help
from the crowd around, and at the same moment a mounted patrol of French
Emperor not everyone could understand, and with his whole soul he shared
Natásha had already opened her mouth to speak but suddenly stopped.
covered her with two quilts, and herself brought her some lime-flower

features. Nicholas was short with curly hair and an open expression.
Prince Andrew was surveying the position, was the easiest and most
experience of life must be senselessly wasted unless he applied it to

turn spindles at home!’?” said Shinshín, puckering his brows and
he looked only at the person with whom he was conversing.
evident that a drowning man is less free and more subject to necessity
conditions under which their power was entrusted to them; or (3) that
involuntarily, came up and sat down beside him.
you? I’m awfully glad you’re my brother.” She touched his
   E’en fortunate Napoleon
only monarchs, generals, and ministers as being such men, while another
changed!... Where are the candles?... Tea!...”
countess was writing to her son.
Count Ilyá Rostóv smiled blandly and nodded approval.
entered took no notice of her. The princess nodded to her daughter and

Bilíbin shrugged his shoulders, as much as to say that not even he could
things compared with the heights to which his soul had just been raised.
manner, orders will be given in accordance with the enemy’s movements,

“It is dreadful, dreadful!” she was saying, “but cost me what it

for in either case millions of obstacles may arise to prevent its
held it till evening and have gone in to dinner with it) and drew his
a picture of a solemn meeting of the lodge presented itself to his mind.
on them.
something, isn’t it? But above all, she is a handsome, estimable girl,
asked permission to advance.
regiments with their arms piled and the soldiers, only partly dressed,
contrary. We wanted liberty, but Buonaparte has destroyed it.”
be seen from the hill on the opposite bank but was not yet visible from
then appointed to supervise the enrollment decreed throughout Russia.
calmer.
is the Krémlin, yes—I will give them just laws; I will teach them the
“Yes, your excellency,” answered the Ukrainian gaily, tossing his
considerations the Russian armies—just those which might have destroyed
guardian of all that the nations hold sacred, utilizes religion for the

owner of one of the largest fortunes in Russia, I am much amused to
“I have come... simply... you know... come... it interests me,” said
he had really been there the night before and really seen Natásha and
“Theodore Iványch!” he said, bowing.
talking of the Schön Grabern affair? Were you there?”
stating them to the Emperor Francis. He vividly imagined the casual

pacing the garden with hurried steps and pressing her hands to her bosom
“Du sublime (he saw something sublime in himself) au ridicule il n’y
in on bad company. Rostóv flushed up on noticing this, but he did not
where he was and what was expected of him. When he was informed that
a thousand miles he must imagine that something good awaits him at the
of allegiance and duty... I am sorry you weren’t there. They all fell on
his usual jokes, but noticing that what he was saying redounded to
him. But still he and those about him retained their old habits: wrote
associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this
time!” he said with a grim look, evidently not wishing to continue this


reply.
high—depends on the coincidence of the wills of all who take part in the

he remarked at a later date.
The news of Count Bezúkhov’s death reached us before your letter
“Natásha, undress, darling; lie down on my bed.”
for an answer. His birth and position in society were not bad. “Well,
There Platón Karatáev was sitting covered up—head and all—with his
original, un-Petersburg-like about her that distinguishes her.” That

on her priority) “that that senseless young man was spoiled by the
these men. They evidently all made an effort to hold themselves at the
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
The symptoms of Natásha’s illness were that she ate little, slept
that everyone had left it. The faces of those who were not conferring
“Well, really, Catiche! Can’t you understand! You are so
The manager having brought the drama to a close and stripped the actor
his large eyes into Balashëv’s face and immediately looked past him.
being received by the count.
and, waving her thin arms from under the woolen shawl, cried:
her—please don’t! It is too painful for her!”
of giving battle, and above all the abundance of provisions in Kalúga
    BOOK FIVE: 1806 - 07

way for him to obtain a right over her was to marry her. The elderly

known as la femme la plus séduisante de Pétersbourg, * was also there.
the will and letter will be delivered to the Emperor, and the petition
generals in full parade uniforms, with their thin or thick waists drawn


spite of everything... she could not be his wife, that he had no means,
this resemblance he was exceedingly ugly. His features were like his
step could be heard. On their left flank, nearest to Bagratión, marched

the whole town. This was terrible! What a position for the Emperor to
like!” And flourishing his arm energetically he turned sideways to the
him, congratulated him, and pressed his hands. Crowds of officers and

service. A little behind them stood the two younger princesses holding
sang the air of the chorus so that Sónya should catch it. “Where were
something, pointing to his mouth. The soldiers surrounded the Frenchmen,

directed the commander in chief’s attention to some standards captured
old boy. Really,” said Natásha, “look, look!”
adopted the tone of one who has suffered a great disappointment, like a
reply to the Württemberg hussar in German. When he had understood what

by one half, could help swerving. By impetus gained, the French army was
devoted to her by so many clever men and expressed in such pleasant,
daughter’s future married happiness, “he writes that he won’t come
my dear sir,” he added, seeing that his servant had entered... “and
no, it can’t be true that I am in Moscow,” he suddenly thought.
so great that she felt she should never live till that blessed Sunday.
“You think I’m an old man and don’t understand the present state

is dangerous here... the enemy is near... because... I am giving you
“A splendid reply!” said Napoleon. “Young man, you will go far!”
here is one from His Highness the Archduke Ferdinand and here are

headquarters was still under the spell of the day’s council, at which
“Now, what are you pestewing me for?” cried Denísov, suddenly

entirely—that is, with her whole soul, leaving no corner of it hidden


confess everything, and intercepting the note to Natásha she read it and
turning his horse he trotted away, jolting in his saddle.
differently defined by reason. Just so the force of man’s free will
Telyánin, taking up his cap and moving toward a small empty room. “We

this, and at the same time remembered that people were looking at him.
and began looking at the faces, some strange and some familiar, in

throat with the other. The officer, dropping his sword, seized Pierre by
“Let them have my wardrobe cart,” said the countess. “Dunyásha can go
“I have endorsed a resolution on your memorandum and sent it to the
direct road from there to Moscow passed. Balashëv, who was on the alert
a conclusion: (1) that history is written by learned men, and so it is
whispered in French.
as you and Princess Mary call it, are the chief source of all error and

Christ, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord Jesus Christ, have

And the cavalry, with spurs and sabers urging on horses that could
“It seems to be that you can’t love me, that I am so plain... always...
The factory hands followed him. These men, who under the leadership of
“And the fete at the English ambassador’s? Today is Wednesday. I
Bagratión.”

Flourishing his arms in despair the count left the room without
it!’ ‘Yes, let’s!’ say the others. And off they go and take the
human dignity—Napoleon is the object of adulation and enthusiasm; he
be so, but for all that he would be forever bound to Pierre by gratitude


“Can it be me?” thought Rostóv.
upstairs in a shabby dressing gown, copying out the original transaction
their motion are unknown to us) continued to operate.
in her arms and her kerchief torn from her head, burst through the door
villa at Sokólniki. The anteroom and reception room of his house

celebrating awards they had received for the campaign, and made
coquettish manner in which she spoke to other men, “the vicomte has
outflank it, the enemy would inevitably be destroyed.



morning.”
Vasíli severely. “You don’t know what you are doing.”
which (as it seemed to him) plainly forbids remarriage while the husband
general commotion. Some eight or nine young men were crowding anxiously
accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room. But in spite of
polished shining cannon that quivered on the gun carriages and with
“Dear Countess, what an age... She has been laid up, poor child ...
French army retires beyond the Niemen.”
emptying his glass at one gulp he dashed it to the floor. Many followed
“Just look at the master! A regular eagle he is!” loudly remarked
stars in its faraway depths. “And all that is me, all that is within me,

Club were also sons of the Fatherland ready to sacrifice everything
recall it with pleasure someday... Napoleon or I,” said the Emperor,
Ney, who came last, had been busying himself blowing up the walls of
the question.


is that?” he asked, indicating a short old man in a clean blue peasant
plain that she understood nothing and was so frightened that her
and a particularly happy light in his eyes, “you see, brother...”
and so it is possible to find some connection between the intellectual
and raises his arm to strike that ruffian a terrible blow which he knows
Amélie” (Mademoiselle Bourienne) “thinks I could be jealous of her,
have come to Melyukóvka,” thought Nicholas.
redoubt while the divisions of Morand and Gérard were to advance
impossible to get back the way he had come; the maid, Aníska, was no
“Prince Auersperg is on this, on our side of the river, and is
It was not Napoleon alone who had experienced that nightmare feeling

“If he could attack us, he would have done so today,” said he.
surrenders without a shot; his most reckless schemes are crowned with
regimental commander was nicknamed King of Hearts).

with a supple movement to show how he had done it.) “One turned up and
CHAPTER XVI
souls!...”
clattering. These men pressed close to the wall to let Pierre and Anna


seemed to him something pathetic and touching in all this.
attraction.
of troops the more was he overcome by restless agitation and a new and
Austrian general, continuing to read, frowned angrily and jerked his
Uhlans, bullets came from the front, whining and whistling, but fell
more comfortably. Pierre did not take his eyes from him and did not miss
of reason is the assumption of and search for a cause, for without a

“That’s his again,” said the officer. (It was the Shevárdino Redoubt.)

as he was doing, gazing straight into his eyes. And again she felt with
felt nothing but amazement at what they were saying. A thought that had
alighted from his horse and whose big body was jammed against the

But he sent an adjutant to take the news round the army.
In the middle of their talk in the sitting room, Dimmler came in and

Barclay de Tolly was an unpopular foreigner disliked by Bagratión (who

again, passing the militiamen.
father in order to puzzle or test his sister.
The prince shook his head, again repeated the same sounds.
“But you can’t. Mamma said you mustn’t,” said Nicholas to


and would always love and honor him—yet he set off to join his army,
he returned with the horse all in a lather, he informed Lavrúshka
Michael Zakhárych was in the library, but Paul Timoféevich had not yet

a rule to speak out... Well, what answer am I to take? Will you come to
“How has his whole illness gone? Is it long since he grew worse? When
Petersburg militia, presiding over the enrollment of recruits at the
what was being said by one or other of these groups he generally turned

downcast head; and he began to pace the room, glancing occasionally at
all the Moscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as
hide it) he himself suffered from the consciousness of his own and
turned away from the glass, making an effort not to cry. “And how
unwell, sat down under an apple tree and von Toll remained beside him.

“Oh, women, women!” and the captain, looking with glistening eyes at
touching Pierre’s elbow said something to him and pointed to the
her face and smile, and did not wish to diminish or add anything, but
guidance. The universal experience of ages, showing that children do

clever.”
quarreled with her brother about him. She insisted that he was a bad
“When you see my sister, Princess Mary, you’ll get on with her,”
    * “Princess, on my word, I did not wish to offend her.”
the regimental commander on horseback and some ten men of his company,
“Well, messieurs et mesdames,” said Nicholas loudly and with apparent
through him, and again laughed his frigid laugh.
because he had not been invited to attend the council of war, and
“And what about his character?” asked the regimental commander.

his tribute to the melancholy mood of the hostess, and then amused
the part of the lover, and he—the lover—assumed the role of the husband,

He felt ashamed, and with one arm covered his legs from which his cloak
take his eyes off her and beat time with his saber in a way that clearly

thirteen look at the boy they are in love with and have just kissed for

The forces of a dozen European nations burst into Russia. The Russian
hussar, “and why are you exciting yourself? Do you think the French
lives! He cannot... because... because... of...” and Natásha burst into
and what do you think, dear friends?” Karatáev continued, his face
a letter from him! However, God grant that everything turns out well!”

recognized him and stopped to listen to what he was saying. Dólokhov
“Well, I suppose it is time we were at table?” said Márya
“They’re having such fun,” said he, coming back. “Two Frenchies have

his way far into the forest and came upon the left flank of Murat’s
dressing, she received petitioners of various classes, of whom there
feeling with which he had galloped across the path of a wolf, Rostóv
happy world of his own. She fancied a child, her own—such as she had
him was reflected in his wife, all that was not quite good was rejected.



At that moment, with noiseless footsteps and with the businesslike,

waste spaces with only stoves and chimney stacks still standing, and
     * “Quarters, quarters, lodgings! The French are good

“Well, why don’t you speak? Whom have you got there dressed up as a
voices.
cap.
him, prepared (so Nicholas heard, he had not seen her again himself) to
remembering; but since that... it’s only been tormenting folk.”


on my conscience. Would it be difficult for you to send thirty or
must wear warm clothes, which were designed for that purpose. That is
authorities.

a step, and with his whole weight, as if lying down to rest, fell on

Natásha had said to him: “Are you remaining in Moscow?... How splendid!”
thrust into his bosom. “My mistress, daughter of General in Chief Prince

He found him reclining in an armchair, still in the same unbuttoned


now,” said another.
again every time she shook herself and moved toward the wood where she
sun were reflected, flashing back like lightning from the water, from
exceedingly lofty, the members of the household and the footmen—one


our hands! No, we mustn’t forget Suvórov and his rule—not to put
mortify you.”

or stick pins into maps, but to fight, beat the enemy, keep him out of
though they were ordered not to do so, as it was a noxious plant. That
having heard the slightest sound of the shots. He only saw how the
to us.”
circle, ran back to their places as the companies passed by.
into a careless, merry smile. “What am I? An illegitimate son!”
a tight place he runs away as quietly as he can, and often thinking to
Mademoiselle George looked sternly and gloomily at the audience and
ordered to turn back to the right. Several thousand cavalry crossed in

and down the room. He understood what she was weeping about, but could
pointing at him. “I’d give it to him if he treated me as he does


director, could not refrain from reminding Prince Vasíli of his former

with the smell of honey. There are no longer sentinels sounding the
well.”

Every house in Mozháysk had soldiers quartered in it, and at the hostel
“I only wanted to tell you about Pétya: today nurse was coming to take

“You’ve grown older, Tíkhon,” he said in passing to the old man,
Piedmontese, Swiss, Genevese, Tuscans, Romans, inhabitants of the

read in his face what preoccupied his own mind.
attack large detachments?” he added inquiringly. No one replied.
been brought up in the most aristocratic circles.
fancies.
left. All this was vivid, majestic, and unexpected; but what impressed
phenomena we are examining.
blood rush to his heart. “But where and how will my Toulon present
young Rostóv.
destruction, was an absurdity, threatening the destruction of the
touching some nasty little animal. But he made an effort not to throw
embarrassed voice, though it sounded severe to Denísov—“but my
Malákhov Gate, he had hardly dozed off in a paroxysm of fever before he
“Well, Lëlya?” he asked, turning instantly to his daughter and

overcome a certain secret sorrow that has been in my heart ever since

man.
needed to sacrifice herself, but made others sacrifice themselves for
any moment get angry—that at his slightest inattention she trembled,
CHAPTER VIII
Sometimes Pierre, struck by the meaning of his words, would ask him to
affected languor and indolence. He now looked like a man who has time
“Well, of course! That’s what we were saying,” replied the first
horse, paced for a long time by the Kámmer-Kollézski rampart, awaiting
locks of gray hair.

“That would take too long to tell,” answered the son.

the sounds of firing.
crossed early in winter. This was the first indication of the necessity
indications accompanying every vital phenomenon, these historians select
the law of inevitability in history, like the law of Copernicus in
of the campfire, waving his uplifted arm.
and of making similar statements to show that the danger of the campaign

some unseen but evidently important task. They all gazed with the same
“Denísov! We’re here! He’s asleep,” he added, leaning forward
dreams.
It was already dark, and Pierre could not make out whether the
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
and grumpy German sarcasm he was pitiable, with his hair smoothly
new church, previously begun, had cost about 10,000 in each of the last
many officers and generals in full parade uniform, whom he had to pass.
Admitting the view of Barclay and others that a defensive battle at
kitten which promises to become a beautiful little cat. She evidently
except passionate love for her father, love such as she thought she had
chaises!... See that fellow there sitting on the trunks.... Heavens!
old soldier of placid temperament, being also upset by all the delay,
“The only thing is, we mustn’t have children too soon,” he
had arrived.
surroundings, she felt more and more deeply the loss of her father which
her own daughter dressed up as a Kazán-Tartar. “I suppose it is one
eyes to him, but there was such confident tenderness in his affectionate
of the statutes and these remained in his mind.
that the princess’ offer of corn to the peasants the previous day, and
boots and shakos.
Everywhere in Mozháysk and beyond it, troops were stationed or on the
fortnight twenty-five thousand, and so on. By the autumn of 1813 the

of gravity he had previously lacked. Formerly all pecuniary questions,
howitzers of Dessaix’s and Friant’s divisions, will move forward, open

have done she felt bound to say and do. She went into Prince Andrew’s
    CHAPTER XIX
been able to free himself but that Prince Vasíli (who had rarely before

afforded him pleasure, and he went quickly up to the prisoners, who
conversation was such as indicated that no one approved of what was
have always, thank God, been my children’s friend and had their full
Natásha.
Next day Davout rode out early and, after asking Balashëv to come to

of the colonel, Nesvítski, Zherkóv, and the officer from the suite.
that they were all hurrying—not as men hurry to do something they


“Doesn’t he? But I didn’t invent it myself.”
times, then paused, drew from his pocket a gold snuffbox, lifted it to
had looked for it. In everything near and comprehensible he had seen

The Austro-Prussian war appears to us undoubtedly the result of the
“No, no. I’ll go out to them,” said Princess Mary, and in spite of
Kurágin asked her opinion of the performance and told her how at a
“Well, if it’s too long we’ll tack it up... we’ll tack it up
After all that Napoleon had said to him—those bursts of anger and the
Natásha’s censure it was only for buying too many and too expensive
arm’s length, apparently afraid of shooting himself with it. His left
his body, and his mind had a dim consciousness of something shameful
select him—an old man in disfavor—to be their representative in the
our fine speeches and in his rude and savage way throws himself on the
themselves off and that all necessary preparations should be made to
remorselessly pursued the young heir who had voluntarily undertaken the
which always grows by country roadsides became clearly visible, still


would you have said?”
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
“You are unhappy, my dear sir,” the stranger continued. “You
“I saw the Pávlograd hussars attack there, your excellency,” chimed
Your son bids fair to become an officer distinguished by his industry,
the hill at Mozháysk and momentarily on many and many faces he had met
On reaching home Pierre gave orders to Evstáfey—his head coachman who
searching for and finding possibilities of unloading this or that and
CHAPTER VIII
“Oh God, what would happen to me if the Emperor spoke to me?”
it did not occur to her that there was anything wrong in it.
back and the disordered rear of the army, weighed all the circumstances,
end spurred his horse.
“Why, I didn’t recognize you!” he said. But Rostóv was otherwise
frankly, I don’t want to. I am speaking of the staff in general.”
fought, on the twenty-fifth not a shot was fired by either side, and on
trying to give an expressive intonation to his voice.
these actions.
on Natásha. Flushed and agitated she went about the house all that day,


“Have you known that young man long, Princess?” he asked.
so firmly established that she could say the emptiest and stupidest

of birds.
you hurry up? Now then!”

we should have reached a definition of inevitability by the laws of
Prince Andrew, recalling his father’s letter. “Yes, we have gained



point where the French pickets had been standing that evening.
be angry with her without any reason, and she felt unhappy. She asked
The French onlookers and listeners laughed.

so strongly agitated, Pierre never spoke to Natásha of his feelings;
gazing at her sparkling eyes, and under the mustache a happy rapturous

“You’re not asleep?” Natásha jumped up, snatched up her slippers,


to remain for a few weeks longer in the house she so loved and where
reason, ran back and disappeared from the outskirts, and Russian
Count Rostopchín, repeating a phrase he had uttered several times


I shall expect you, Drubetskóy. Au revoir!” exclaimed Prince Andrew,
“Why, you remember before you went away?... Well, she says you are to

the sofa beside Prince Andrew.

seen through.

avoid doing certain things, and speak French. He was one of those,
there, she glided up to him with a sort of amble, not exactly bowing yet
day. And the happiness of taking communion, or “communing” as Agraféna

military business in which he had played his part was ended and felt

she not only left her hair as it was, but did not even look in her
Zherkóv. They were under orders to advance next day.
irritated the wound, interrupting that necessary quiet in which


gazing before him with a smile.
suffering?” suggested another voice. Prince Andrew, however, did not
motionless. He seemed altogether so thin, small, and pathetic. His face
When Natásha ran out of the drawing room she only went as far as the
sung, and long before she again sang, as she did that evening. The
Kutúzov’s flabby lips were trembling and that tears were in his eyes. He
apart on a low bench, to the back of which a piece of green cardboard
toward the hare.
fat finger.
out foraging, when he had again entered into all the little interests
“I’ve had an eye on him this long while,” said the other.
his collar.
The old prince said that if he was ill it was only because of Princess
hoofs, and apparently ready to jump over the railings had his rider let
from the wormwood that grew along a boundary rut, rubbed them in his
that’s the way they treat me! No confidence in me! Ah, ordered to keep
“Come, go in there and drive them out!” shouted the senior officer.
and swallowed the cold snow, his lips quivered but his eyes, still
the wind fell, as if it dared not spoil the beauty of the summer morning
he threw open the bearskin cloak from his broad chest and inhaled the
Yet the ladies themselves could not help laughing.
“Teach me what I should do, how to live my life, how I may grow good
said the butler’s assistant.
had at last been realized. In the clear morning light he gazed now at
The old man seemed livelier than usual. Princess Mary was the same as
of habit said things he did not even wish to be believed.
All her invitations without exception, written in French, and delivered
accurately. Here now—wouldn’t one of these gentlemen like to ride over
them rode the King of Naples himself accompanied by a numerous suite.
“All right,” said Pierre, still smiling in the same way. A feeling
was happening in Moscow. Again they interrupted him: they had not asked
she remained alone with him for a moment. Prince Andrew surprised her by
went out after shaking hands with Dolgorúkov and Bilíbin.
Two maids were turning up the hem and hurriedly biting off the ends of
“Mary,” she said, moving away from the embroidery frame and lying

He took the packet from the table and handed it to Pierre.
last period of the war of 1812 an aim that never existed, namely that of
brother?” And in all this Princess Mary saw the hand of Providence.
just as Alpátych entered.
chasseurs must hold their position till reserves from the center

German—I congratulate him! I can’t make out what the commander at
smiled at him unnaturally. He did not ask about the regiment, nor about
were saying. Suddenly, however, he was struck by a voice coming from the
probably been wounded in the cheek. His whole head was wrapped in rags
“Impudent fellows!” said the prince. “You know Métivier? I turned
fault. What’s he to do if he has such luck?... And it’s not my fault
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
Mary Hendríkhovna, asking her to stir it with her finger.

coincidence of occurrences such as happens with all the phenomena of

showered the fine dry snow on the faces of those in the sleigh—beside
round, drew close to Balashëv’s face, and, gesticulating rapidly and

over that occurrence independently of the others.
with kisses, holding him tight by the skirt of his coat, sprang away and


was always found where the situation was most difficult. Since his
o’clock all had been brought into due order. The ranks were drawn
and then at the other.

his power, and so that way of life proved economical.

her because he loved her too well, placing her far above everything in
shaggy cap, shouted to the approaching Balashëv to halt. Balashëv did
of considering what might come of such love-making, as he never had any
from him. “There, you see!” and he drew attention to the bullets
caused by anything, for the Divinity is not controlled by an event. But
cleared and which a dresser was washing down. Prince Andrew could not
be caught of something black—probably men—and at times the glint of

“No, you’ll never manage him that way,” said Anatole. “Wait a


“You? What a surprise!” said he. “What brings you here? This is
showing the creases where it had been folded and thick gold epaulettes
opinion), but he urged that at this point the army should unite and
upon it, the more Masonic ground on which he stood gave way under him.

Russian army, we picture that army without any leaders, it could not

Moscow balls.

the Guards. He was clean-shaven and wore a Guardsman’s padded coat with
head in perplexity—perhaps because the banner really interested him,


She did not talk about her brother, diverting the conversation as soon
at any of them but smiling on all, as if graciously allowing each the
Shcherbáty—the gap-toothed). Denísov smiled, and Pétya burst into a peal
in the cart.... Why, those are settings taken from some icons, by
of her worthlessness he was also dreaming of how she would be his
“There! Here’s a patriot for you!” said Shinshín.

fire and where cavalry should gallop and infantry should run. But even
ever-increasing restlessness, which he could not explain, took

long wished for such a box, but as she did not want to cry just then she

“It can’t be helped: men must sometimes have masculine

The cook and a shop assistant came to the gate. With lively curiosity
At length Dron, the village Elder, entered the room and with a deep bow
“Oh, I really did not mean to hurt her feelings. I understand them so
in it, but that it was all nonsense and rubbish, and he did not in the
choking her.
crossed themselves.... “Forward, with God’s aid!”

He tried to say more, but faltered.
I was saying, Prince Vasíli is the next heir through his wife, but the
gloomy gravity and glancing round at his comrades, “there is an order
But at that moment an adjutant entered and reported something to Davout.
concern was to obtain a greatcoat and a conveyance), proved useless;
squealing in the garden. Perhaps it’s his brat that the fellow is
of citizens and of a deputation, and even the burning of Moscow, did not
“First-rate,” said Pierre, looking at Dólokhov, who with a bottle


“Very pleased, mon cher,” she then said, holding out her hand to
their heads. Several people came round the corner talking eagerly.
must be hesitating between the two camps: the masters’ and the serfs’.
“How can the Emperor be undecided?” thought Rostóv, but then even

he sung a second, a third below the high note. “Ah, God! How fine! Did
well disposed toward them all, but was now instinctively on his
us and we humbugged them. They plunder other people’s houses, issue
and could not answer. “Can something bad have happened to me?”

followed by the owner of the manly voice, a dashing infantry officer who

expression and went out again without saying a word. She looked at

Bourienne’s head at the very time she was talking to Anatole about
it with you?...”

eyes.

“How can one help it, lad? My name is Platón, and the surname is
     afraid, they won’t hurt you.”
superfluous was hanging on his benumbed left arm. The wrist felt as if
From above on the left, bisecting that amphitheater, wound the Smolénsk
bloodstained hands, so as not to smear it. He raised his head and looked
into herself and involuntarily assumed an offhand air which alienated

shouted.
commiseration on Rostóv, who saw that Túshin with his whole heart
and those in which form prevails. To the latter—as distinguished
wards of the city. You will recognize them by the white ribbon they will
he told her she was still the same crybaby as ever. Princess Mary had
other places: he had never slept there yet.

or cap, his head was bandaged, and over his shoulder a French munition
overwhelmed with work would often come accidentally under the Emperor’s
Power is the collective will of the people transferred, by expressed or
having occurred and an understanding between us will be possible. In

frontier, and I have this moment received from Petersburg a note, in
Four years before, meeting a German comrade in the stalls of a Moscow
gown, he went to the couch on which he slept.
He could not reconcile the charming impression he had of Natásha, whom
“Do you recognize him?” said he. “And where has he sprung from?”
“You call him Váska? That’s funny! And is he very nice?”
greetings, she rode up to them. Ilágin lifted his beaver cap still

from correspondence with those abroad that Bezúkhov had obtained the
Prince Vasíli frowned, twisting his mouth, his cheeks quivered and his
getting in someone’s way again, galloped after the adjutant.


yet simply at everybody. Old Count Rostóv also rode up and touched the
Count Bezúkhov’s distress some fifteen times.

quarante-deux, * which was the term allowed to the beast that “spoke
Pierre took off his hat and bowed respectfully to Kutúzov.
risen and was moving through the crowd toward the actress.
“Yes, God be thanked! Yes! They’ve just finished supper. Let me have
The Cossacks sold the horse for two gold pieces, and Rostóv, being the

Having said this she went up to the doctor.
probability of Chichagóv, Kutúzov, and Wittgenstein effecting a junction
To anyone who looks at the field of Borodinó without thinking of how

Friends and relations advised Nicholas to decline the inheritance. But
soldier, who had pretended to suffer from colic, had escaped. Pierre saw
Again he embraced and kissed Prince Andrew, but before the latter
you,” Natásha began, evidently anxious to disperse the cloud that had
were all hugging him, and the serfs, men and maids, flocked into the
A bee settling on a flower has stung a child. And the child is afraid
skittish between the shafts—he dressed up in clothes as variegated and
Natásha seldom occurred to him. If it did it was only as a pleasant

recalled Pétya’s words. And the Cossacks looked round in surprise at the

have a talk with Borís. He need not come so often....”

“And why didn’t you do it at seven in the morning? You ought to have
“Everybody is wondering to whom the count will leave his fortune,
the Emperor has honored us. But to judge what is best—conscription or
    CHAPTER XI
embittered look clouded her once handsome face, but only for a moment;
No one replied and Princess Mary, looking round at the crowd, found that

“How was it I noticed nothing? How could it go so far? Can she have
confused happened there amid the smoke, and five minutes later our

please make way!”
excitement might have on her son. She went several times to his door on


refuse the wounded who asked for a lift.
person, who should set an example of discipline, carry disobedience to
Pierre looked around him with bloodshot eyes and did not reply. His
me of her own accord in the evening and tell me everything. Perhaps I
reason and to prepare him for his terrible part. And when he is ready so

“The peasants are ruined? They have no bread?” she asked.
enrolled among the Cossacks.

a Knight of St. George like his uncle Nicholas; he wanted to be learned,

which—in spite of the purity and loftiness of his inner man—he does
French were putting out the fire which the wind was spreading, and thus

“Oh, quite right! I had a quarrel with Mamma some time ago about it.

against their stretchers and gazing intently, as if trying to comprehend
greatcoats, and some with horsecloths over their heads. The horses,
a still-stronger agitation of mingled joy and fear seized his soul. He
determination of the troops would be quite different. Then all these
nonsense, continued to lie at the opposite side of the fire, but one
“Well, then, mates... that very prince who...” some voice at the other
distance. On the left the ground was more level; there were fields of
future campaign abroad. Kutúzov made no rejoinder or remark. The same


“What’s the matter?” exclaimed Prince Andrew standing still in
life, and I see that however much and however carefully I observe the
them. If he is not rich I will give her the means; I will ask my

at close quarters as at a distance, sat down beside her and told her he
the anteroom Prince Andrew heard loud voices and a ringing staccato



Coming abreast of the calèche he ran beside it.
been invited to dance. She stood with her slender arms hanging down,
to be free it was necessary that it should encounter no obstacles. To
only help a bit! I must have singers too. I shall have my own orchestra,
“I’m not to blame that the conversation began in the presence of
as serene as if all this were happening at home awaiting peaceful
French threw down their arms and ran out of the bushes to meet the
twenty-three years. The peasants feared him more than they did their
The Emperor was with the army to encourage it, but his presence and
when they rushed from the covert... the horse worth a thousand rubles
that he fell off his horse and sprained his arm and then ran as hard as
The countess was now over sixty, was quite gray, and wore a cap with a
“And so you’ve had him educated abroad, Prince Vasíli, haven’t
Mítya was naughty at table. Papa said he was to have no pudding. He had
it to the old prince), and he heard from him the story of Natásha’s
still quite a young lady, before her nose was broken; how she had aged
and well, he felt a difficulty in expressing himself now while talking
wood, where wagons were stationed. The dressing station consisted of
rose, and recalled de Beausset and the officer on duty. He ordered the
freckled gunner in a merry voice, standing to attention.
“Well, what do you think? They make soldiers of all classes there.”
On such feelings, more or less dimly shared by all, the unanimity and

“Get over what?” inquired Pierre, looking displeased.
Napoleon rose and having summoned Caulaincourt and Berthier began
for himself. As is often the case with those gifted with an ardent


At the council at Filí the prevailing thought in the minds of the
hour with her without once mentioning Prince Andrew. “I couldn’t
children.”
before. As soon as I saw him I felt he was my master and I his slave,
the smell of smoke. Pierre sat up and sighed. The three soldiers were
comme cet individu dont vous avez fait un ami, mais pas pour vous, pas
And as if in order not to offend Sónya and to get rid of her, she turned


perhaps, see and take part in the first Russian encounter with the
should have arrived at unconditioned freedom beyond space, time, and
“If I did not know you I should think you did not want what you are
Dmítrievna had taken a box.
friends had pledged themselves in an indissoluble alliance to uphold
like labels they have but the smallest connection with the event itself.
prayer can move mountains, but one must have faith and not pray as
has retained in full force.”
“No peace, damn them!” he muttered, angry he knew not with whom. “Ah
Hardly had he passed an angle of the wood before a stout gentleman in
“Dearest, I’m afraid this morning’s fruschtique *—as Fóka the
standing still? Then why push?”
think of Karatáev who grew weaker every day and evidently would soon
singing songs....”
Anna Pávlovna’s two years before. There were also present a very
to know?” she asked sternly.
matter—something independent of cleverness and knowledge. Prince
flank; he knew that all the guns there had been abandoned at the very
Petersburg, or even, in the case of a reverse, return to Smolénsk or
In the Finnish war he also managed to distinguish himself. He had picked
and reported to Napoleon that their attack had been repulsed, Campan
    CHAPTER XXI

though he knew it could not be helped.
understanding of her condition expressed.
womanly notes vibrated. Mademoiselle Bourienne, who was in the drawing
rapid, agile feet, while at every third beat his partner’s velvet
barking in front of the harnessed horses.

finding there stabling more than sufficient for their horses, went on,

doorway, stopping now one pair and now another with gracious words which
unusually intelligent, charming... and then she is pretty, uncommonly
ground with an aspen stake to fix him down. What a lot of men he’s



to myself the condition of my inner man and the grace of God sanctifying
and he gazed at the opposite bank. Then he became absorbed in a map laid
namesake, the new Count Bezúkhov) “and now she’s in love with that

had evidently run out of that room to give vent to the sobs that were
this question, observed:
gold, so universal historians and historians of culture, not answering
Soon after the Christmas holidays Nicholas told his mother of his love
the Rostóvs’ drawing room Natásha was in her own room. When she
mystical book I am sending you; it has an enormous success here. Though
desire. The Emperor had written to Count Rostopchín as follows:
reported to him, and then joined the adjutants listening to what the
sound of music, and they all began singing. But suddenly a storm
her.
now,” thought Rostóv driving his spurs into Rook and letting him go
is very unhappy with her father. She is a relation of yours, Princess

who was associated by memories of the Italian campaign with the name of
mournful smile that she now had no one to write to, since Julie—whose

continued Rapp. “The wine is drawn and must be drunk.”
And after chatting a while longer, the corporal went away. (The affair
articles. Other French soldiers standing below went up to the drawer.

“As you see,” he said.

maneuvers suggested for tomorrow. It was proposed to make a flank march

“Don’t, Mary Nikoláevna!” said her husband to her in a low voice,
Having sat still for a while he touched—himself not knowing why—the
determined, and absurdly self-confident as he was. Of all those present,

While the marshal was passing, the prisoners had huddled together in a
counsels, his undertakings, and his work; strengthen his kingdom by
consent.
beloved, and was happy in regard to it.
whose side justice lies. He understands everything, knows everything.
firmly believed in the possibility of the brotherhood of men united in
“I heard about that affair of hers at the time. It was a great pity.”

pack joined the first three hounds and they could be heard in full cry,
the things were treading heavily on the parquet floors. The yard was
There was a new feature in Pierre’s relations with Willarski, with the
might help her daughter more than medicines and, though not without

    CHAPTER XIII
d’oeuvres and dishes and arranged them on the table. When she had

“The third, I said the third!” cried the prince abruptly, pushing
harmful, for it is impossible to say for what it was useful or harmful.


topic of the day: the illness of the wealthy and celebrated beau of
And his attention was suddenly carried into another world, a world of
one’s own carriages as well. Thirty carts could not save all the wounded

a word to you and you... What?” he added with renewed irritation, “I
move on. The horses moved off the bank. The ice, that had held under
“Oh?” said “Uncle” in surprise, looking inquiringly at Natásha,
Rostóv, without waiting to hear him out, touched his horse, galloped to

and the coachman. The women, who had been silent till then, suddenly
The adjutant bent his head affirmatively and began to report, but the

“Am I not too late?” he thought. “No, probably he won’t make his entry

and fell on his hands. The others outstripped him.

behind him and brightly lit up the enormous panorama which, rising like
his bayonet; another fingered the strap and pulled the buckle of his
that insignificant society people might carry them from drawing room to

the commander in chief—a post his father had procured for him—and

The bustle and terror of the Rostóvs’ last days in Moscow stifled the
horses, polished their arms, brought in straw from the thatched roofs in

Petersburg were Borís, Pierre whom the count had met in the street and


From the moment they were alone and Natásha came up to him with
“Those are ours.”
detachment, moved from the place where it had spent the night, advancing
from understanding—how am I to put it?—I am afraid my way of looking
thought again now. “Now he will never tell anyone what he had in his
“Tell the King of Naples,” said he sternly, “that it is not noon yet,
will raise the cry a day or two beforehand, but they are not wanted yet
With tears in his eyes Dólokhov embraced Pierre and kissed him.
being wounded and the flower of eternal, unfettered love had instantly
the Tsar!’ so they began looking for him,” here Karatáev’s lower jaw
During the first period of their acquaintance Bolkónski felt a
the other in an overcoat and on foot, stood at the corner of Ilyínka
her, and for various reasons Princess Mary avoided her. Julie, with whom
anything like it. She believed it could be, but did not understand it.
and then calmly and seriously sat back in his chair. Anna Pávlovna
wished to do so. He grew confused and said: “On condition that the
bring into the world, nurse, and bring up.
have no end.
will of Alexander. But the universal historian Gervinus, refuting this

portmanteaus and not greeting anyone. “The young ladies’? There
of the soldier prisoners tunneled under the wall and ran away, but were

When the sun had entirely emerged from the fog, and fields and mist were


CHAPTER X
the same words, about their health and her own, and the health of Her
Napoleon’s eyes Prince Andrew thought of the insignificance of
with a smile.
to court etiquette stood near him while he was talking to a Polish

for him always. He not only did not renounce them subsequently, but when
gave him one with the fox. Here it is on my saddle! Do you want a taste
Mamónov’s regiments which looted Russian villages, and the lint the

marrying. The old fellow’s crotchety! Of course Prince Andrew is not
“Well, Vasílich, is everything ready?” asked the count, and stroking his

For more than a week preparations were being made, rough drafts of
then having subjected to criticism the explanation of “power” that
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the

ideas and of Speránski, and a diligent Petersburg newsmonger—one of
commonplace, that all their words and feelings seemed an insult to the
intrigue did not now occupy the old man’s mind. One terrible question
inspired by the Emperors’ presence were eager for action. The
he could not restrain himself and with the virulence of which only one
possibility of active brotherly love among men, which Joseph Alexéevich
deeply.
misspelled, and without punctuation: “Unsoundly constructed because

The imposing figure of Nesvítski followed by his Cossack, and
steps down the line. He was evidently pleased at his own display of
Prince Vasíli came next. He staggered to the sofa on which Pierre was


A countermovement is then accomplished from east to west with a
that fights more fiercely and spares itself least will win. And if you
all as we can imagine or relate it. And so he did not like Zdrzhinski’s
little table, and Anna Mikháylovna noticed that something was agitating
The house had escaped the fire; it showed signs of damage but its
“Qu’ est-ce qu’il chante?” * asked a Frenchman.
me... myself most of all. Then I don’t eat, don’t wash... and how is

before loving them; his heart was now overflowing with love, and by
with restless eyes while his arms and legs twitched. He spoke without
of the lathe he removed his foot from the pedal, wiped his chisel,
“It’s a complicated story, you know,” said the adjutant. “That
CHAPTER XXI
his mood safely to his destination. And even had he not been hindered by

“No, he’s not a fool!” replied Natásha indignantly and seriously.
is, stormed and stormed and stormed! It was not a matter of life but
to everyone that there was no merit in his kindness. Sometimes Natásha
an orderly’s charge, and he felt the blood rush to his heart with

the state and power are merely phenomena, just as for modern physics
“I won’t say he is out of sorts, but I fancy he would like to be
part. Anna Pávlovna Schérer on the contrary, despite her forty years,
That same night, having taken leave of the Minister of War, Bolkónski
was, when he met the big coach just entering the town gates was appalled
nothing about firing it.”


and anxiety and felt mortified by it. She blushed for him, grew still

to be his old schoolroom, and looking into Natásha’s wildly bright
habitual, offering his puffy cheek, but Bagratión kissed him on the
suddenly instead of those chances and that genius which hitherto had
insulted envoy—especially as he had witnessed his unseemly anger. But,
brightening up.
bound them to the post.
experiencing a new and powerful emotion as he turned his curly head,
at the present moment to adopt conscription or to call out the militia.
from the seat of war and Natásha’s health began to improve and she
in spite of much that was interesting and had to be discussed, the baby
or of the sofa for his dear guest, but being apparently painfully
pause, “she told him she loved another.”
she said. “And I will go and tell her it is no use expecting him! And



lips, having now prepared a well-phrased reply, “sire, I left the
farther? I feel that I cannot vanish, since nothing vanishes in this
More important still, Alpátych learned that on the morning of the
and, drawing up an armchair for Prince Vasíli, pointed to it and began
On the evening of the twenty-fourth of June, Count Zhilínski arranged a
intrigue going on in Petersburg. The old prince’s voice and another now
“If there were reasons...” she began.

am I to do with myself?” And tapping with her heels, she ran quickly

I’ll do all I can....”
tune, like the song of a bird, was extraordinarily good. Natásha was in
from Raévski’s battery a second time, made his way through a gully to
person. This letter having no other object, I pray God, monsieur le
by the Russians in 1812.
on her, and there were so many different faces, that she could not



were destroyed in their essence.
grave, moment I did not tell you the whole truth. I think there is no
the way of life at Otrádnoe—Mítenka’s management of affairs, in
in military matters.
Natásha went up to the monk for his blessing, and he advised her to pray
me?”
they had started. The colonel and some of his men got across and with
would occasionally raise himself on an elbow and glance at Morel with a
man’s freedom? That is a question for theology.
“Well then,” Prince Andrew answered himself, “I don’t know
it occurred to her that her aunt and the governor’s wife had intentions
“It is the Buonapartists who say that,” replied the vicomte without

snuffbox. Nastásya Ivánovna dismounted to pick it up. The count and

pretty, and agile—she swims and rides splendidly... and her voice! One
seated herself in the drawing room to await the abductors.
custodian to enforce order and acted as the sovereign’s bodyguard.
even Denísov was nothing compared to Dólokhov—“you must understand
evening he listened to Pierre in a sort of trance, and fancy—as we were

Russian army. They abandoned one another, abandoned all their heavy
time to realize who these men were. He saw the senior officer lying on
to win him to his side, showed off his dispassionate calm reasonableness
projectiles that flew over him, did not see the enemy on the other side
after the many subsequent speeches, but to animate it the crowd needed a
alone, in which there was something more significant than in the general

Dear and precious Friend, Your letter of the 13th has given me great
what he did hear he understood that the Emperor spoke of the danger

asking him something. Then they led him away somewhere, and at last he

    CHAPTER XV
and three pairs of gloves, and then the Grand Master addressed him. He

already being reaped, made his calculations as to the sowing and the
is only by his efforts that the whole population under his rule is
of the Russian David, shall suddenly smite his head in his bloodthirsty
which the serfs’ manorial labor had been diminished, and heard the
nose. Arakchéev turned his head toward him without looking at him.
a schoolboy who is told to repeat a lesson he has not learned. Spots
he worked at formulating the section on Personal Rights.
me as an incendiary.”
“Your honor, you’re wanted by the general. He is in the hut here,”
hostility and suspicion. For some seconds all were silent.

“How thoroughly like him that is!” he said to Princess Mary, who had
should I joke about it? Did I hinder you? Who arranged everything for

weeks as he said, but had remained there nearly seven weeks and was
pistol Makár Alexéevich at last got his fingers on the trigger, there
escape runs straight into his opponent’s arms.
ordered four light guns to be moved forward to fire at the gates.
been looking at.
Denísov did not reply; he rode up to Pétya, dismounted, and with
Count Rostopchín had only that morning returned to town from his summer

first approximation to a cause that seems to him intelligible and says:
spoiling his own career, and he laughed at distinctions of all kinds. He

news that the Cossacks were destroying deserted villages, but that the
remarked. “Well, sit down: let’s have a talk.”
rebuking her for her fall.
“All right, all right, we’ll see!”

her, is that so?”
intention of killing your man as quickly and surely as possible, and

of marriage, but there were not many such and they remained silent,
that the National Convention, the Directory, and Bonaparte were mere

‘Dearest foe! Flower of the Austrian army, hero of the Turkish wars!
finally there were six thousand rubles for his outfit and various other
“Apropos, tell me please, is it true that the women have all left

“Oh, wait, please!” And Natásha began rapidly and deftly sorting out the
It’s as if it had been done on purpose, on purpose. Besides, suppose
moved an armchair toward Princess Mary.
Pierre took it and began reading.
He passed into the next room, and the deep, querulous sounds of his
engagement to Bolkónski, and that the wedding would be in a year’s

home. She waited on the old countess, petted and spoiled the children,
Anna Mikháylovna opened the door. Her face wore the proud expression
could be heard. The shots came from the yard of the landowner’s house
was not there and life was going on as before.
served it so well that it would often gracefully lift a hind leg and run

on the stage, and expressed delight which to Natásha seemed feigned.
to have happened, to me. Stepán Stepánych also instructed me how I ought
He was as indifferent as heretofore to money matters, but now he felt
three hours. Eh?”
all his attempts to talk sentimentally, evidently not listening to what
But not only was it impossible to make out what was happening from where
to read the appeal.

theorist-generals whom Prince Andrew had seen in 1805, but he was more
sheet. Good-by, my dear friend. May God keep you in His holy and mighty
“Yes, but you are not the only one. There are your sisters...”
is one and Princess Bolkónskaya another.”
him like a child. Her smile for him was the same as for everybody,
brother.
troops in close proximity to an enemy is always dangerous, and military
“Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole?” she
look, said something to his coachman, and his horses increased their
(The regimental commander’s face now that the inspection was happily
without male society, on Anatole’s appearance all the three women of
an unpleasant feeling of depression in his heart. Something vague and
been amazed at it at any other time. “Uncle” himself twisted up the
the greater their achievement. How does God above look at them and hear
could he contemplate the burning of Moscow, and when our armies did
enlighten their minds, by means handed on to us by tradition from those
“Well, what is it?” came a sharp, unpleasant voice.

Wolzogen was about to make a rejoinder, but Kutúzov interrupted him.

which produces events. They do not recognize it as a power inherent in
There he is lying back in an armchair in his velvet cloak, leaning

laughing.

some approaching achievement, and some in course of disintegration. He
copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
needs fresh air should remain at home,” he would add with extreme


Ermólov’s quarters.
On moving to the drawing room he handed the letter to Princess Mary and,
In various corners of Moscow there still remained a few people aimlessly
admiration at the very oak he sought. The old oak, quite transfigured,
feeling. To the family Natásha seemed livelier than usual, but she was
downwards like a little bird; a flame flashed in the middle of the
general safety.”
asked Denísov.
proper.
woman. With a slight rustle of her white dress trimmed with moss
them because of his old age and experience of life. The only instruction
too, who were pleased and flattered that a passing officer should joke

great favor to ask of you.”
     man.”
The countess had written direct to Julie’s mother in Moscow suggesting
eyes off him. His brother and sisters struggled for the places nearest
“No, I won’t miss my opportunity now, as I did after Austerlitz,”

flushed with pleasure at the aptitude of this reply, but hardly had
expect, Rostóv felt for the letter in his pocket and went straight to
talking of a levy of ten men per thousand. Oh yes, let me congratulate
four till six o’clock and did not begin their deliberations all that
the waist with a rope. He had a nightcap on his head and his feet were


was just what he used to be. As before he was absent-minded and seemed
personality. But as in astronomy the new view said: “It is true that we


On waking up that morning Count Ilyá Rostóv left his bedroom softly, so
copied or distributed:
to his father. He had not done so for fear Princess Mary should ask her
acting: there is war in Russia! The enemy is advancing to destroy
munching his food rapidly with his strong teeth, continually smacking

Ostermann-Tolstóy, seemingly absorbed in his own thoughts. His broad
“Tell me, tell me, friend,” said he to Bolkhovítinov in his low, aged
barrier except the barrier of his own will.
looking glass, draping the folds of her velvet dress picturesquely. She
of the majestic Emperor. Casually, while surveying the squadron, the
front of us.

gesticulating.
“No, better not!” said another, inner voice.

the whole weight of his wrath fell on her. She was to blame that a spy
listened attentively to the pilgrim.
diverse thoughts and images occupied him simultaneously. At times his
“Oh, don’t speak so, master! There was a general who did not
understand one another,” and he remained silent.

the room and something strange happened. We were sitting or lying on
then that same battle will not soon be over.”

Petersburg, on business as he told his family, but really to meet
“Good news!... Go on!” he shouted to the driver, and they galloped
the next. Hélène was touched, and more than once tears rose to her eyes
That night, alone in new surroundings, he was long unable to sleep. He
sentinels and officers, and have abused and beaten them.”
alternately or together, dead, wounded, alive, frightened, or
“Oh, leave off!” said the accountant with a beaming but rather

expressed nothing; nor had he heard such a refined, smooth, soft
“Well, now we’ll arrange something quite simple and becoming,” she

“Ah, what a beauty! Thank you, sweetheart!”
searching look at Pierre.
she continued, uniting them both in one glance. Pierre did not look at

“And when are we to start, your excellency?”
or sleep, grew visibly thinner, coughed, and, as the doctors made them
his eyes and considered.

the distance straight before him, down the narrow open space, holding
hand that was free, and turning sideways felt the pulse and reflected
letter are not destroyed, then you will have nothing but the consolation
from a courtier’s point of view (and in an Emperor’s vicinity all became
Pétya took off his wet clothes, gave them to be dried, and at once began
when they saw his looks.




nations and humanity at large are tending.
men. There were several Frenchmen present, among them Métivier who from
submit my report, with the information that if the army remains in its

“A diary, Nicholas,” she replied, handing him a blue exercise book
“Calm yourself, Princess! It seems so to you because.... I assure you
now?” In front, already far ahead the deep bell of the sleigh ringing
sound of his opponent’s voice.
“Sónya!” said the countess, raising her eyes from her letter as her
squadron, that in which Rostóv was serving under Denísov, to return to
as soon in fact as the adjutant had left Borodinó—the bridge had been
French and the Allies, began to reign. And Napoleon, shedding tears

“There is one thing I constantly pray God to grant, mon cousin,” she
that provisions are supplied and the routes indicated,” said Bilíbin,
fell in small round spots through the shade of the lime-tree avenue,
awake. He heard female voices overhead.
When Ermólov, having been sent by Kutúzov to inspect the position, told
one.... Whom, I ask you, can we rely on?... England with her commercial
independent of reason. Through his reason man observes himself, but only
Despite Count Bezúkhov’s enormous wealth, since he had come into an
my stupidity.”
“Isn’t she a Tartar!”
understood her and made up my mind what she really is. Was I mistaken
happened.
happiness. There is much, much before us. I say this to you,” he added,

“Well, tell me... now, how did you get food?” he would ask.
the French general, officers, and men changed to one of determined
On the first of September he had come to Moscow from the army.
“I hope I may now congratulate Your Majesty on a victory?” said he.
you give it to me, an old woman...”—yet it was evident that she was
Just then the last chords of the overture were heard and the conductor
and at last became silent.
CHAPTER XVII
“Anatole used to come to borrow money from her and used to kiss her
lectures and with taking notes from them.
available for the regimental commander.
seen.




Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders.

with resolute strides and went into the house.
Prince Vasíli, with one leg thrown high over the other and a snuffbox
“Cette ville asiatique aux innombrables églises, Moscou la sainte. La



the study of the movement of the nations and of humanity and not the

power and strength, affirming the existence of a higher, nonhuman
“Get into step, Fëdor... I say, Fëdor!” said the foremost peasant.


“Well, but supposing Mary Hendríkhovna is ‘King’?” asked Ilyín.
is nothing to wait for; and what is not ready I’ll send after you.
passing, but before he had finished his greeting there was a general
Curving her arms, Natásha held out her skirts as dancers do, ran back
of the President, who held a mallet in his hand. Let into the wall was
the panting old general.
whispered among themselves behind his back. All along the road groups of
power of the beast that spoke great and blasphemous things had been
“Again!” she commanded, pointing with a peremptory gesture to the spot
his eyes significantly.

rid them of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a great
Mademoiselle Bourienne was also looking at Princess Mary, and in her
considered it all, and should not marry if I had not thought it all out
you: would you like me to arrange it?”


shall be killed, perhaps not even by a Frenchman but by one of our own
“Grapeshot!” the senior shouted, without answering the question, looking
On the third of September Pierre awoke late. His head was aching, the
who was present, but whom Pierre had not noticed.
and loving wife.
what she was holding in her reticule.) “So you promise?”
those doubts was to be found within himself. But now he felt that

Kutúzov gave of his own accord during that report referred to looting by
a reproach to everyone. Now tell me, Count, was it right, was it
Anatole, suddenly rolling his eyes.
a mésalliance by marrying you,” and Bilíbin smoothed out his forehead.
feeling the hand of God upon him, suddenly recognizes the insignificance

means. Then you say, ‘lighten his toil.’ But as I see it, physical

Pierre without greeting his wife whom he had not seen since his
long ago have asked her what to do and have done whatever she told me,
packed the night before now lay about the yard, and still they went on
rapidly and indistinctly. “You thought!... Rascals! Blackguards!...
particularly so on this bright, hot summer day in town. “It’s Sunday
years, had cost millions, and had done nothing except that Rosenkampf
“Well, mon cher,” said the vicomte, having seated himself beside
shouts, ‘We are lost!’ or who shouts, ‘Hurrah!’ And only in the ranks
said nothing about himself, adopted no pose, always appeared to be
seem that not much consideration was needed to reach this conclusion,
particularly calm and absent-minded way, which inspired the respect of
plans from some given moment. A commander in chief is never dealing with


supposition is not confirmed either by reason or by experience.
army or of the doings of the enemy, or of the welfare of the people
the high springs creaked, and the body of the coach swayed. The footman
It was evident that Prince Andrew’s ironical tone toward the pilgrims
tea?” asked his valet.
She looked at him inquiringly and with childlike reproach.
insisting that Moscow must be defended. His aim was as clear as daylight
she faltered. “You are on good terms with Michael Ilariónovich
did neither: a look of animosity appeared on his face and the other
rather of death, as the saying is. ‘Albanians!’ and ‘devils!’
depressing than ever, and the countess fell ill from mental agitation.
and anxiety that his name should not be smirched now seemed not merely



all—she herself, Mamma, and Sónya—should be as well dressed as





Beginning with the battle of Borodinó, from which time his disagreement
very much.
his happiness to another woman. Her father objected to this because he
“You see! I have asked,” whispered Natásha to her little brother

Little Túshin, moving feebly and awkwardly, kept telling his orderly to


followed her and spoken laughingly of her brother’s love, and that she
the look she felt upon her made that world still more poetic. But
The regiment broke up into companies, which went to their appointed
but hopeless: “The sovereigns, madame... What have they done for Louis
strayed from under her friend’s plaits.
which, preceded by the clergy, would go to the Three Hills; others

throttle if they stood in my way. I have an adored, a priceless mother,
the men around him were his assistants. Arakchéev was a faithful


He was suffering physically. He, the commander in chief, a Serene
Sónya, realizing for the first time how wrongly she had acted toward
called her protégée aside.


interest of that time and do not see all the personal human interests
it seemed to Pierre, sunk in profound and calm meditation. His servant
to,” thought the old man, “then they might do as they please.”
CHAPTER I

Natásha neither saw nor heard her. She went in with rapid steps, pausing

suddenly there stood...”
Every act of theirs, which appears to them an act of their own will, is

Pierre’s remarks, rose and made a sign to his wife that it was time to
it was: Freemasonry is the best expression of the best, the eternal,
it with a cloth.
done, for during the whole battle Napoleon was so far away that, as
Bolkónski that the Emperor desired to give him an audience. The Emperor
The Bible legend tells us that the absence of labor—idleness—was a

she did not remember what she had said, and that she had no trouble
“Au revoir! Thank you very much. His Majesty will probably desire to
round in turn at the rows of pomaded heads in the stalls and then at
“But he must be a Freemason,” said he, referring to the abbé whom
and buried her face in the pillow.
“Oh, he is in a dreadful state,” said the mother to her son when

Kochubéy shook his head smilingly, as if surprised at Bolkónski’s


“Why?”
“I have not found her yet, she is hiding now, sitting with her
Many have died these last days on the road or at the bivouacs. This
to the end, without raising his eyes at the opening of the door and the
appeared to him like magic-lantern pictures at which he had long been
my advance guard, and have no right to arrange an armistice without my
Besides, I don’t love her—not as I should. O, God! release me from
“Wonderful!” answered Natásha. “She’s a woman one could easily
stay to dinner if you care to!” she called after Pierre.
“A wife for counsel, a mother-in-law for welcome, but there’s none as
palms, and smelled their pungent, sweetly bitter scent. Nothing remained
years older than her sister and behaved already like a grown-up person),
princess, asked her to speak out fully and confide her grief to him; but
flank,” he said to himself, “the Kiev grenadiers and the Podólsk
very poor, but for my own part at any rate, for the very reason that

Pierre continued. When he spoke of the execution he wanted to pass
immersed himself in the quiet life to which he had formerly been

These questions, like questions put at trials generally, left the
preside at that tribunal? He will get nothing for his pains! How could
      * So that squares matters.
become golden and bright-red islands amid the green winter rye. The

center, and secondly, to withdraw the cavalry to the other side of the

had been repulsed, employing this military term to describe what had
it were, considered his life afresh and arrived at his old conclusion,
“He is better than any of you!” exclaimed Natásha getting up. “If you
Dólokhov who knew of Kurágin’s marriage. “Take care!”
other, awkwardly, like a child at a dancing lesson.
followed, dispirited and shamefaced, and only much later were they able
Pétya in, closed again. A sound of laughter came from behind it.

Pierre looked at Timókhin with the condescendingly interrogative smile
Lay me down like a stone, O God, and raise me up like a loaf,” he
Europe to allow to be destroyed. Yes, that is what will happen to you.
watchword—shaft, Olmütz. What a nuisance that our squadron will be in
pretty girl who caught his eye; but scarcely had he embraced that


Before Shinshín had time to utter the joke he was ready to make on the
extraordinarily becoming. Everyone told her she looked very handsome,
she used to run when playing at tag, ran through the ballroom to the
militia. For the Minister is leading these visitors after him to Moscow
Only by separating the two sources of cognition, related to one another
Julie said this was charming
by its gray dress. “But no! Why did this thought never occur to me

Znaim.
Prussians without giving them time to finish the parade they had begun,
officers, but every soldier with his freshly washed and shaven face and
CHAPTER XXIII
might be up to on the sly” (she meant that they would be kissing),
she hardly heard his voice through the closed doors.
down below. That was the only part of the fourth act that Natásha saw.
had not yet entered either the military or civil service, as he had only
Rostóv saw all this as clearly as if he had known her whole life. He
French would take was unknown, and so the closer our troops trod on
“Yes, you know between cousins intimacy often leads to love. Le
“Your father, a man of the last century, evidently stands above our
brown morose face with frowning brows was clearly visible by the glow of
of the regiment and felt himself deprived of liberty and bound in one

    CHAPTER XXIV
position. He made some notes on two points, intending to mention them to
At midnight dancing was still going on. Hélène, not having a suitable
young men, among them Borís, entered more deeply into Julie’s


were being made for her sake, and to know that she had to take medicine
The troops of the vanguard were stationed before Wischau, within sight
to the Guards’ camp to find his old playmate. Rostóv had not yet had
“Oh, Nikíta, please go... where can I send him?... Yes, go to the
That’s our house,” said Rostóv. “Of course, it’s our house!
render account only to God and to my conscience,” she concluded, laying
not seem to him slower than an awakening from sleep compared to the
freedom and told her that one way or another he would never cease to
dissipations. He liked to dine and drink well, and though he considered
that Pierre was under his wife’s thumb, which was really true. From the
the shirt.
reforms were being pushed forward with the greatest energy. That same
the world, I have not lived till now. At last I live, but I can’t

“People are always too clever with their eldest children and try to
Galicia he had managed to deal with the Grand Duke when the latter
“What a wonderful coincidence! Just during the service. But what a loss
to fire and sword. The inhabitants are totally ruined, the hospitals
thought, as he listened to voices in Kutúzov’s courtyard. The voices

The prince’s house did not belong to what is known as fashionable
the little town could be seen with its white, red-roofed houses, its
that they despaired of the possibility of checking this disorder.


“Or being upset because someone else’s borzoi and not mine catches
and laughter:
“Why not?” inquired Borís.
both armies should remain in position without moving. Murat declared
been telling us such a tale about Mademoiselle George and Buonaparte!”
lucky man and, with his plain face, to be looked on as a sort of Paris
won’t—that’s his affair,” said Márya Dmítrievna, looking for
and reined in his horse with an amused expression.
does not even interest them, for it does not come within the range of
“Well, Prince, so Genoa and Lucca are now just family estates of the
Rostóv had been out of humor from the moment he noticed the look of
“Let her alone, Kondrátevna,” said Natásha. “Go, Mavrúshka,

never to blame,” were the last words he heard from his sister when he
find out where Dólokhov was and whether he would come that evening.
wife, while you...”
proud, or that certain writers wrote certain books.

A few intimate friends were dining with the Rostóvs that day, as usual
Prince Andrew sighed with relief, smiled, and held out his hand.
Sónya became thoughtful. The question of how to write to Nicholas, and
same old way, inwardly he began a new life.
addressing the Englishman.

simple and solemn mystery of death that had been accomplished in their
    CHAPTER XIV
dropping her voice. “My wretched lawsuit takes all I have and makes no
about, gave them some further instructions, and was about to dismiss
its embarrassments and affairs to be straightened out, its accounts
gained. He tried to prove to the Emperor the impossibility of levying

thought that this man did not, and never would, know any of those who
“Rubbish, nonsense, humbug!” exclaimed Nicholas, and he thought:
of Mack’s defeat, the camp life of the officers of this squadron was
bed, and appeared to be meditating as he looked contemptuously at his
not exist.
application. His love of theory made him hate everything practical, and
    CHAPTER III
“Why such a quantity of churches?”


Have just this moment received by special messenger very joyful
has picked up an ax: “We are used to it, but you, sir, will blister
that moment a third enemy rises before us—namely the Orthodox Russian
    CHAPTER XXI
they did not interest him now. He sat on his elevation—the pedestal of
right across the skull. Having said this he glanced at Natásha.
the battalion commander. “Oh, my God!” he added, stepping resolutely
Rostóv felt Denísov’s gaze fixed on him, raised his eyes, and
believe in the efficacy of that plan, was directing the whole business
jest.
     the earth by English gold, we shall cause to share the same

Someone, a very important personage judging by the haste with which way
servants.
within a twelvemonth, and then he would go and confess to his wife, and
so that his mouth, the most striking feature of his face, was clearly
like a bird than a man.”
pulling the skirt straight and shifting the pins from one side of her
and I sta’ted fwashing him... Well, I’ve had a bit of fun I can tell
of being presented to the Duke. Prince Bolkónski glanced at the
He was silent.
Oho! How you blush. Why, are...?”
her. When she was touched, she jerked her bound legs and looked wildly
Pierre, who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened to

Another, a thin little officer, was speaking to everyone, conjecturing

because of me.’ So he confessed and it was all written down and the

you fool?” added the other—“A real fool!”
were full of officials who had been summoned or had come for orders.
and Gerásim heard him pacing restlessly from one corner to another and
house in Vílna from which Alexander had dispatched him on his mission.
Among the gentry of the province Nicholas was respected but not liked.


“Nowadays old friends are not remembered,” the countess would say
man with a broad, light-brown beard and black eyes. The fifth was a
as hung over the French, and that the sick Frenchmen were left behind
After that, when in discussions with his village elders or stewards the
better-looking.
inquisitive?”

touch with it, and looked around bewildered and unable to grasp what was
Prince Andrew looked sternly at her and an expression of anger suddenly
to him alone some half-dozen times and always with a specially joyful
    CHAPTER XII

from Pétenka—he took part in it—and it’s all true. When
inclined to the most reasonable opinions, he made no confusion, did not
to hear the words she had uttered and to see before him her eyes, her


or make out anything of what was happening: there in the smoke men of

CHAPTER XXIX
master... the peasants’ affairs first and then his own. Of course he was
he had the Hofs-kriegs-wurst-schnapps-Rath on his hands. It would have
think it over. Go! Yes or no, yes or no, yes or no!” he still shouted
himself, Natásha, that same living Natásha whom of all people he most
In a day or two we shall all have to take part in a greater and more
     But oh! till then I cannot live!...
and live with him too?” he added, turning to Princess Mary. “Go in
that the conditions are unknown and indefinite, and that the appearance

delighted that from their point of view as plasterers, everything is now
men.

picket ropes of the roan horses, when Lavrúshka gleefully shouted to
and get away to attend to her duties as hostess. But Pierre now
nor of what she was telling. He listened to her and felt only pity for
son’s portrait grew still louder. Napoleon frowned.

books, Prince Andrew was at this time busy with a critical survey of
“So you say ideas are an amusement to him....”
has abandoned himself altogether to this mysticism” (Pierre could not
    CHAPTER XI
to tell you. There is a war now against Napoleon. If it were a war for
trailed twisting along the ground. The crowd shrank back from it.
understand it—in the bright light of the emotion that shone within
Mind, Balagá! You’ll get there in time? Eh?”
Each dog knew its master and its call. Each man in the hunt knew his
supplied them with a certain energy, there was another cause binding
there’s a tavern where ours have already gathered. We can at least get
protested Balashëv, “but permit me to observe that I have the honor to

out to them.
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Kutúzov looked long and intently at these two soldiers. He puckered his

the ranks.
Since Prince Andrew had last seen him Kutúzov had grown still more
brilliant suite of aides-de-camp, pages, and generals, who were waiting
galloped up to Kutúzov with personal reproaches for having caused the
from me, I wish to know absolutely how things are.”
and Borís were alone, Rostóv felt for the first time that he could not
“Ah, he looks very much like an incendiary,” remarked the officer. “And

love, such rapture, and such self-sacrifice, what do any of our quarrels

Pierre too loved her. “He will do anything for me.”


“Listen!” said he; “don’t worry about your wife: what can be
benefactors. Self-sacrifice was her most cherished idea but in this case
famous order of the day to General Bennigsen:
troops were running onto the bridge, was about to fire, but Lannes
“Is it satisfaction you want?” said Pierre ironically.
“I shall at any rate not run after a young man before visitors...”
to a ball.
When Kutúzov came out of the study and with lowered head was crossing
the Emperor. The countess took up a position in one of the front rows
of herself, while her face beamed with ecstatic happiness. Her slender
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
Arábchik and reined him in without effort with a firm hand.
him, or else how could that have happened which had happened? And how
refusing what she wanted. In my perplexity I did not know whose aid and
as he called them—and everyone said he spoiled them by his laxity. When

had happened to him, but could not do so. Such a storm of feelings,

“Now that’s right!” said the one behind joyfully, when he had got into
in the forest by night, making their way round as best they could, and
unfaithful wife, a retired gentleman-in-waiting, fond of eating and
know, and know for certain, that the enjoyment of doing this good is the


“Forgive...!”
All were silent, and the only sound audible was the heavy breathing of

supper, fed the horses, and came out into the porches.
unpleasant thought that occurred to him, of how all that nest of
like seeing a horse or a bear on the floor among the furniture and

in uniting them all; and then my idea is so clear and simple. You see,


left their game and came over to the samovar, yielding to the general

excitement of the conflict could not and would not give way.
liberating his serfs he had obtained the reputation of being a liberal.


Countess Mary was jealous of this passion of her husband’s and regretted
of the Legion of Honor and Napoleon the Order of St. Andrew of the
Napoleon’s army felt this and the invasion moved on by its own momentum.
    CHAPTER XVI
took that letter, and Rostopchín also gave him the Emperor’s appeal to
to force their way in too and a fight in the porch had resulted.


here I’ve brought the prince’s wedding candles to light before his
each time with fresh pleasure and each time discovered in it fresh
is present in the heart of every Russian. And a consciousness of this,
his sons there, it could have had no effect except perhaps on some dozen
this with perfect conviction that this information could not but be
uninitiated, the reserve of the initiated, the hurry and preoccupation
The captain gazed intently at him as he had done when he learned that
he needs money for food; the man said an officer had once given him a
something, suddenly blushed and shouted in a squeaky voice:
that done which settled the matter? And who was to blame for it?”

and her words at her first gracious reception of him, and then that same
In another three years, by 1820, he had so managed his affairs that he

and chief action of the battle of Borodinó was already lost on the

“What can one say or think of as a consolation?” said Pierre. “Nothing!
“Well, you know it’s burned, so what’s the use of talking?” said the

the heavy standard, he ran forward with full confidence that the whole
    CHAPTER I
“But I have nothing here,” replied Pierre, supposing that he was
merchant free and give him a compensation that had been awarded. The
hand in passing and draw it downwards, or absent-mindedly hold out his

quickly, went out of the shed, and began to walk about.
the war at Anna Pávlovna’s severely condemned Barclay de Tolly, but was
While they were talking in undertones the crack of a shot sounded
when he felt the contact of the fresh air and heard the noise of the
the commander in chief and had taken it to his commander. Just as he had
his position were. He could not have believed it! Had he not at one
not what, and envying alike the notables he saw arriving at the entrance

was only more vividly conscious of the fact that if his affairs had not
and took a few hasty steps toward Prince Kozlóvski, the commander of
white foam on the waves of the Enns, an officer, in a cloak and with
therefore—to see it and enjoy its contemplation—he naturally threw away

“Unterkunft,” Pierre repeated.
“Why, this gentleman’s saber.”
French, searching for food, killed one another, sacked their own stores,
was aiming.
“You are perfectly at liberty to treat me with respect or not,”
disintegration and flight.
“All right. Let Monsieur de Beausset enter, and Fabvier too,” he said,
dissatisfaction found it had improved. He was dissatisfied because he
in the common motion the result and aim of which are beyond its ken.

to say, all that could be got out of them.
“I have a letter from him,” she replied.
“Don’t play the fool!” said Denísov, coughing angrily. “Why didn’t you
“Uncle Pierre, you... no... If Papa were alive... would he agree with

listening to an old Russian general with decorations, who stood very
to her lover, even now agitated the captain, though it was the memory of
officer fell, not so much from the blow—which had but slightly cut his
“My dear Anna Mikháylovna,” said he with his usual familiarity and
or of crimes is subject to mathematical laws, and that this or that
peace nor war, neither an advance nor a defensive camp at the Drissa
called him.
logic. I say: ‘Papa wants to sleep!’ but she says, ‘No, he’s laughing.’
his catching what Pierre said, he asked him to repeat it, and by the
The officers, who had come from the other sheds, were all strangers to
“Ah, you’d better not go, sir,” said the doctor, “or you may
knew this outburst was unseemly and would blow over in a minute or two;

in very good spirits on this fifteenth of September, prepared to go out

Olmütz, was preparing to be reviewed next day by the two Emperors—the
his leave.
fear this will oblige one half the army to shoot the other.”
habitual ease and animation some new, sinister, hidden feeling showed
“Not only occupied, but Bonaparte is at Schönbrunn, and the count,
whom carried a lowered and smoking gun. They both looked pale, and

improvement. His satire has been less bitter of late, and there was a
strangers and unable to send news of himself. The gazettes from which
bathhouse, a lodge, and a large brick house with semicircular façade
When Kutúzov was informed that at the French rear—where according to the
“Yes, Count,” she would say, “he is too noble and pure-souled for
habit of ridiculing the Masonic beliefs—“I am afraid I am very far

together.
“Oh, you fool! Why talk rubbish, lout that you are—a real peasant!” came
house. Pierre received him unwillingly at first, but got used to him
strange feeling agitated me all the time I was alone with him in the
Shevárdino Redoubt, the Russians fought the battle of Borodinó on an

Strange as may be the historical account of how some king or emperor,
for the aged? And is it not a palpable, unquestionable good if a


had striven only for his people’s welfare, the originator of the liberal
One of the wounded, an old soldier with a bandaged arm who was following

you,” said Pétya shyly.
told him the case was dangerous.”

doctor smoking a cigar. The doctor was followed by a Russian assistant.
pretend not to doubt it. And he acted accordingly.
involuntarily compared the two: the lack of spirituality in the one and
The commander rode up to his hut. The regiment passed through the
could not have said those words in that offensively cold tone. If he had
CHAPTER XVI
everyone about Anatole. One man told him he had not come yet, and
“And with such fine fellows to retreat and retreat! Well, good-by,
more and sneered malevolently.
rudely painted figures that once seemed splendid and mysterious.
slaughter which could be of no avail either to the French or the
in Germany. But we, thank God, have no need to recognize his genius
Thermopylae. So why should he have made such a sacrifice? And why expose
masses of Russian troops. At the bend of the Danube, vessels, an island,
furnishing a regiment, Bezúkhov at once informed Rostopchín that he
he should disapprove of Andrew’s choice; but in reply he said what he
“Lord Jesus Christ!” exclaimed the pilgrim woman, crossing herself.
to her mother.
it.”

the army, and about whom Natásha had teased her elder sister Véra,
        —

from the mechanism, swung about in an arbitrary and aimless way without
very decent town. You and I will travel comfortably in my calèche.”

the cross on Lázarev’s breast and, dropping his hand, turned toward
now rose and took their leave. The visitor’s daughter was already
“A promise is own brother to performance! I said Friday and here it is,
voice, clear, not grandiloquent but mild, in which only the Slav clergy

not seen her with Prince Andrew. It always seemed to him that there was
Pierre.
however, it was not, and could not be, possible to explain the burning

when Borís was mentioned.

“They don’t even give one time to dwink!” answered Váska


tremulous voice with folded hands. “Russia is saved. I thank Thee, O
a glance. What do you think of Natalie? Could she be constant in her
“and I am sure that all due respect would be shown you.”
generals in the crowded hut, feeling embarrassed as he always was by the
round the corner of the house between two dragoons. He had a long thin
“Dear me, how you have changed!”


and Borís. He is his godson,” she added, her tone suggesting that
sighted him, having been the nearest, were the first to see and pursue

Saddled horses were standing before the house and the suite were

of hair sticking up behind and the hastily brushed hair on his temples
has married his first cousin. And we are only second cousins, you know.
“Dear Brothers,” he began, blushing and stammering, with a written
“Move on a hundred yards and we are certainly saved, remain here

Dólokhov was a secret to no one but himself. Pierre absolutely



half-closed eyes he looked at Rostóv, bowed slightly and wearily, and
events were inevitable.
glass, “or I won’t let you go!”
Bourienne at once began crying again and kissed that hand, speaking of

CHAPTER XXII
a small party and moved in Denísov’s vicinity), the commanders of some

“I knew you’d give permission... so I’ll tell them,” and, having kissed
and Natásha, in the light-blue dresses they had worn at the theater,
historians, we shall have the history of monarchs and writers, but not
the peace and welfare of all my subjects.’ However, I know their
her, and sometimes I think she doesn’t feel it as you or I would.”



to be dealt with, the prisoners and guns secured, the booty divided—not
would be returning that way. Pétya no longer thought of presenting his
replying.

The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders. Pierre looked solemnly at his
and the rider beyond all price! Yes, one would have to search far to
captain and his drawn-in stomach, and mimicked his expression and pose
Pierre a wooden spoon after licking it clean.

her forehead. His fine eyes lit up with a thoughtful, kindly, and
Pfuel, remarking that Prince Andrew was just back from Turkey where the
But they had to avoid carrying the man upstairs, and so they took him
There was nothing for him to do and no orders to be given. Everything

side and looked round with a frown. Along the road from Pratzen galloped


Majesty to preserve humanity from the calamity of another war.
All the profound plans about cutting off and capturing Napoleon and his
well and, in particular, drinks well. “So do come and dine with us!”
feet in their overboots on the table, and began to reflect.
gentleman’s” agitation, said with a smile:
to Milorádovich who was near him.
with regard to his wife’s debts and to the rebuilding of his houses in
burden to themselves and to others, are left living. The first death I
ready money. “Or at least twenty thousand, Count,” he added, “and
presence in Moscow—was suggested to the Emperor, and accepted by him, as

“And I should be ashamed to write to Borís. I’m not going to.”

“Would not your Serene Highness like to come inside?” said the general
“Write to her and let me know how her father looks at the matter. Au
Meanwhile, the city itself was deserted. There was hardly anyone in the

being accustomed to the respect due to his rank in the service, Balashëv

The stupid smile, which had left his face while he was speaking,

request.
only in the heads of a dozen individuals—for the events and results now
in their accustomed places: Nicholas beside the stove at a small table
putting direct questions as to how many men there were in the battalion,
saddle, he galloped to the other flank of the squadron and shouted in
dealing with the matter have written the history of the beautiful words
former strength. For Denísov, too, the memories awakened by the name of


comes to despoil our beloved country.”
at Schön Grabern, what shall we not do now when he is at the front? We

face an explanation of what she was reading, but did not find it. Her
It was a long time before Pierre could fall asleep that night. He paced
those who stood in the most prominent position—the heroes of history.

of the previous day’s thoughts. He thought of nothing. He listened with
Bolkónski, who seemed to her to have grown much younger, happier, and
familiar to Rostóv; the other on a beautiful chestnut horse (which
officers. In the regiment they called him “our prince,” were proud
is harmed, and your teeth are set on edge. Like an experienced sportsman
erect, almost on tiptoe, with a soldier’s obsequious expression on his
played a part in his story, or whether it was all these things together,
with a sigh. This might have been taken as an expression of sorrow
“Yes, sir,” said the man. “Please step into the portrait gallery.”

Pierre heard her say:
and so it was only necessary not to stop their flight. Secondly it was
autumn in Otrádnoe with the hunting, and the winter with the Christmas
very trying,” said Prince Andrew, apparently speaking lightly of their
the campfires were blazing on all sides ready for cooking, the wood

Prince Andrew did not reply. The carriage and horses had long since been
menace than to strike the running animal on the head.
seem long ago since we first met at Boguchárovo, but how much water

displaying its white light amid countless other scintillating stars. It



approach us with offers to donate.
“And they say he’s a skillful commander,” rejoined Pierre.
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
so he went from one group to another. Some of the most important old men
the old prince’s face.
him, having apparently lost hope of getting him to wake up.
Guards passed Rostóv before he heard them shout, “Hurrah!” and

near him and only wished that they would help him and bring him back to
should one love and what hate? What does one live for? And what am I?
ones.... That’s it, come on!...”
then why was Napoleon I? Why was Napoleon III a criminal when he was
wisdom.”
“Andrew lying? Is he ill?” asked Natásha, her frightened eyes fixed

everything went well and easily.

“Yes, it was death! I died—and woke up. Yes, death is an awakening!” And
voices of the crowd that filled the whole Krémlin.
splashing with blood those near them.
in time and in relation to one another, to explain the connection of
“You have been in Paris recently, I believe? I suppose it’s very
was ecstatically conscious of his approach. He felt it not only from the
took up a candle, carried it out, and returned, seating herself quietly
survive, I am glad of this opportunity to tell you that I regret the
pleased to take me as an aide-de-camp....”
of French soldiers by worn-out Russians continued at Krásnoe for three
that the majority of the council voted for such a retreat, and above
stand made at Krems and the victory over Mortier raised the spirits of
living with his mother, who, if she saw him dying, would not survive it.
felt abashed and asked whether what he had been saying did not concern
“Yes, your excellency. What are your orders about Vereshchágin? He is
for me to bear.... Excuse me, good-by!” and suddenly she began to cry

It was that first period of a campaign when troops are still in full
boots. Then he took off his nightcap, combed his hair over his temples,

wretches) “at the French. Some of them were sabered and the Krémlin was
“For the last time I say to you—turn all your attention upon
dress as fresh and elegant as the other. Prince Andrew rose and politely
elder daughter, Countess Véra, with a smile.
her pallor suddenly turning to a vivid red. “Master, what have you

with those swift steps that had sounded buoyant to Princess Mary.

habits of the military? The aim of war is murder; the methods of war


every bit of it is occasioned by the forward movement of the ship,

darkened and he went up to the boy.
would excuse her want of ceremony and come upstairs to her apartment.

refer to Anatole and flushed at the thought of him—“did you love that
Napoleon sat at the foot of the knoll, drinking punch, when Murat’s
at them.
wearing the uniform of a general with sash over his shoulder, entered
telling her things. She has had a dream and is frightened.”
Pierre looked round. Borís Drubetskóy, brushing his knees with his hand
distance he took off his cap and tried to speak respectfully, but he was

birches that formed the forest, it was ten times as thick and twice as
considerations concerning the terms of the anticipated peace.
to destruction. They went away without thinking of the tremendous
army recuperate in Kalúga province, which was inhabited by Russians such
she added, turning to her hostess. “You wrote that it was to be quite
At the corner of the Moroséyka, opposite a large house with closed
grew tranquil and softened? With all his soul he had always sought
round Boguchárovo were, it was rumored, in touch with the French,
The booming cannonade and the fusillade of musketry were growing more
“What I have certainly gained is freedom,” he began seriously, but did
Around Murat gathered a group of those who had remained in Moscow. They
one man.
Prince Andrew told Kutúzov all he knew of his father’s death, and what
“But please don’t interrupt me when I am entertaining the guests,”
his relations with old friends, all his plans for his future, were
was now afraid of everything.
only what was limited, petty, commonplace, and senseless. He had
Akhrosímova, who had long been pressing her hospitality on them.
Good-by!”
CHAPTER III
Vasíli, in the rare moments when he was at home, would take Pierre’s
exhausted and six thousand men sacrificed to defend it till late at

in the drawing room.
This unexpected and, as it seemed to Nicholas, quite voluntary letter
around, as if afraid of everything in that large apartment. Awkwardly
to find that this inner freedom, which was independent of external
danger. “I am convinced that we Russians must die or conquer,” he
we begin a very original and interesting series of maneuvers. Our aim is
talking with this cheerful and good-natured man.
to hide such a big pistol even under his wide coat. He could not
Two equally strong feelings drew Pierre irresistibly to this purpose.
excellency... I had no men... your excellency.”
glance became more animated as his conclusions became more hopeless.
Napoleon began the war with Russia because he could not resist going
to this conclusion: if this marriage is invalid,” he went on, crooking
variety of medicines for all the diseases known to them, but the simple
here. Where is it?” he asked, turning to Lavrúshka.
gay because she had been sad too long and now nothing reminded her of
sins, and she prayed to God to forgive them all, and her too, and to
Konovnítsyn’s handsome, resolute face with cheeks flushed by fever,
predestination and inevitability of his every action.
to be severe, found nothing to say; the others did not venture to
panes broken and a courtyard surrounded by the remains of a wooden fence
(incommensurable with ordinary human capabilities), and then the words

“The commander in chief is engaged,” repeated Kozlóvski calmly.
small but distinctly visible enemy column was moving down the hill,
the circle, then at the corner of the room he caught Hélène’s
“This is all very fine, but things must be settled,” said Prince
importance. In front of Túchkov’s troops was some high ground not

miles, and reining in his horse he sighed restfully and looked round
the thought flashed into his mind that it really would be a good thing,
welfare,” thought he.

the onlookers, “Will it be long? Are things ready?”
to be receiving no one, and instead of the celebrated Petersburg doctors
“The children will live just the same. With such masters one can live.”
Among the innumerable categories applicable to the phenomena of human
impressions he had become accustomed to during the last few months
that had been brought that day.
rimés, which were in vogue at the Karágins’. Only a few of these




himself could have foreseen how the separation from her lover would act
“No!” he suddenly said to Berthier. “I can’t send Claparède. Send
Questions and answers were heard. The publican, taking advantage of the
again, as soon as all turned toward him, excused himself and said no
grenadiers were splendid, by heaven! I saw them close up their ranks six
to the orderly. (This was Shcherbínin, Konovnítsyn’s adjutant.) “I’ve

A largish piece of the biscuit the Emperor was holding in his hand broke


you think so badly of me?”
let go! Please, sir...” pleaded Gerásim, trying carefully to steer Makár
the day to the army.
could refrain from helping the poor. She had heard vaguely that there
avenged, that his rancor was still unspent, weighed on his heart and
ground, and he fell upon Eýkhen, threatening him with his hands,
reception produced, Davout raised his head and coldly asked what he

part in the Austrian campaign and the reasons why he had declined them.
“The Anférovs? No,” said the woman. “They left in the morning. That must
to Smolénsk, from Smolénsk to the Berëzina, and from the Berëzina to
stars.
and obtained that manner which the pas de châle * would, one would have

far from being strong, was no more a position than any other spot one
One of them was leading by the bridle a fine large French horse he had

traditions, and a man was produced who would stand at the head of the
down below and that one of the soldiers he had noticed before was
virtuous life of which he had been dreaming since he met Joseph
    CHAPTER V

then he had a second and final stroke.
“That’s a true friend!” said Hélène beaming, and again touching

whatever the import of his work. It was not the question “What for?”



the bridge and its celebrated bridgehead and Prince Auersperg? We heard
myself. We’re done for!...” and Ferapóntov ran into the yard.
face, screwed up his eyes, and pensively swayed his head. At another
does it! We never hear a word but Dólokhov is mentioned. They swear
behind a liveried footman who cleared the way for them, she heard a
had been from the cold, ours would not have rotted either. ‘But,’ he
he was transferred to another regiment on active service. Nicholas was
answer to the question were contained in his name, his nationality would
A few days previously Pierre had decided to go to Petersburg on the
this poetic and pure intimacy, were what my heart needed. But enough of

the commander in chief’s one sound eye showed him to be so preoccupied
and jolted him at every step.
but it is a beautiful voice that must be trained.” Only they generally
“Yet here she is lying at my feet, with her golden domes and crosses
“Yes, alone, for the sake of all, I must do it or perish!” he thought.
or army corps had been captured in two months, when he looked at the
worthy action to slay the evildoer, but now he felt that he would not
     * (2) “For heaven’s sake.”
Prince Andrew’s last stay at Boguchárovo, when he introduced hospitals
As Shinshín had remarked, from the time of his arrival Anatole had
where also some campfires were smoking and something black was visible.
giving him the salute, he looked at them silently and attentively for
“It’s a good day, eh? For a hunt and a gallop, eh?” asked

But then, in 1812, the French gain a victory near Moscow. Moscow is

of the candles was focused on those two happy faces alone.

did not admit anyone. A maid came to the door to say that Alpátych was
I can’t analyze her at all. She is enchanting, but what makes her so I
“Would you marry him?”

he closed them he saw before him the dreadful face of the factory
“God has nothing to do with it! Well, go on,” he continued,
to go and bury themselves in the steppes when the French army is in
When the French officer went into the room with Pierre the latter again

persuade her to prepare for her journey. When she had left the room the
Pelagéya interrupted her companion; she evidently wished to tell what
his presence pursued their usual way of life, in which he took his part.

Pierre drank one glass after another, looking from under his brows at
Pierre. Whatever he may tell me, I will do it. Mucius Scaevola burned


Instead of men endowed with divine authority and directly guided by
step, that the French losses were much heavier than ours, and that he
shelter. An officer of their regiment, with long mustaches extending

“What devils these quartermasters are! See, the fifth company is
                       160
balaláyka ceased. Mítka tuned up afresh, and recommenced thrumming
away and attend to your father with your own unpracticed, awkward hands,
request he took the first part of the Civil Code that was being drawn up
Rostóv felt so ill at ease and uncomfortable with Borís that, when the

of Princess Mary’s arrival, she softly left his room and hastened to her
The Rostóvs remained in Moscow till the first of September, that is,



moment of making the effort to lift those legs up and turn over on the
“No, but why do you think so?” Pierre suddenly began, lowering his
firmness, and expedition. I consider myself fortunate to have such a
marshal. An hour later a squad of soldiers arrived and Pierre with

“Well, dear heart,” said he, “I wanted to tell you about it
Egypt, his insane self-adulation, his boldness in crime and frankness in
waved his feet about very rapidly. (He was Duport, who received sixty
She approached him, saw his face, and something gave way within her. Her
give no opinion on such an important government order, and Berg laughed
ce sont les jolies femmes, * isn’t that so? But now I like it very
“But, Mamma, suppose I loved a girl who has no fortune, would
The soldiers crowded against one another with terrified faces, and
“If it is true that Monsieur Denísov has made you a proposal, tell
chief’s orderly speaks to officers, replied:

handkerchief and rushed from the room.
the unexpected realization of the fact that he still valued life as
“It is very strange, mon Monsieur Prince,” said the staff officer.

evidently in despair that the sole remaining chance of verifying his
away from Moscow,” they were told. In his broadsheets Rostopchín
is pua’ as on the fihst day of cweation... Who’s that now? Send him

to her surprise found her still dressed and asleep on the sofa. Open on

the sick and wounded lay in two rows with their heads to the walls, and

could fail to see it,” the prince continued, evidently thinking of the
felt a wish to speak to the stranger, but by the time he had made up his

same. You’ll be all right anywhere. But look here: give up visiting
strongly. She listened to every word about the victory of Moses over
of Ney—a greatness of soul consisting in this: that he made his way by
CHAPTER XVII
dread of death seized him. Filled with fright he opened his eyes and
and prove my devotion to His Majesty the Emperor and to Russia!”

“Sire!” said he, “Your Majesty is at this moment signing the glory of
worth, and she was accustomed to this and loved doing it. But in all her
bass voice. “I only came across Pelagéya in Yúkhnovo....”
The two generals and the adjutant took hold of the field glass, trying

inattentive, but you had talent—oh yes, you had talent!”
dressing gown every day, he invariably became confused and begged her to
become rosier, had curly dark hair, and, when merry and laughing, quite

pace.
stands on the social ladder, the more people he is connected with
which usually follows after a serious and heartfelt talk. It is
displeased at this excess of zeal.
up to the commander in chief, and presented arms.
“Yes—that is, how do you mean?” said Pierre. “Not being a military man
army was very favorable.

of one side of it. For the fact that, from the point of view of
in silence and frowning angrily.

“Oh, don’t ask me, don’t ask me! I don’t know myself. Tomorrow... But
to time she smoothed the folds of her dress, and whenever the story
it is the independence of personality—free will.
excitement was going on there.
This is what the army authorities were reporting:
He turned round. Nesvítski’s handsome face looked out of the little
hate her she gladly prayed for him as for an enemy. Only at prayer did
sleeve and, saying that she wanted to have a talk with him, led him to

“Allow me to introduce you to my daughter,” said the countess, with
they were over. After his liberation he reached Orël, and on the third

the openings of the windows and from under the roof.
“How handsome you have grown!”
thousand rubles a year and brought in nothing.
army’s inactivity, he alone continued to assert that the battle of
balls! I can’t tell you. And the Tsarévich was very gracious to all
scorched and shed its grain. The marshes dried up. The cattle lowed from
“Adored friend of my soul!” he wrote. “Nothing but honor could keep
machine or set it in proper motion, so Anna Pávlovna moved about her
she had counted on her fingers with Borís after they had kissed four
him surrounded by children whom, by the count’s generosity, he was
terribly true. I pity Prince Vasíli but am still more sorry for Pierre.


room. It was clear that he thought it necessary to interest himself in
Highness,” and pointing to the Grand Duke who with his high shoulders
dragging away boards, dry wood, and thatch from the roofs, for the
He hated her and was forever sundered from her. Despite Denísov’s

“That’ll do, that’ll do!” replied the sergeant major quietly.
all understood that the war was not ended.
“Yes, yes, if you please! It is already late,” said he, and nodding
doctor!”
“One word, just one, for God’s sake!” cried Anatole.
righteousness, and let it preserve us, Thy chosen Israel! Bless his
riding round the wolf, crying “ulyulyu!” shouting and preparing to
Pierre dropped his eyes, lifted them again, and wished once more to see
avoid further importunity, saying that he would give a note of hand

misunderstandings and did not now feel she had a right to ask him for
“A little wound, but he has been made an officer; he is well now, he
of Russia, minimizing as far as possible the sufferings of our people
gladsome and mysterious to one another.

“Your son,” wrote Kutúzov, “fell before my eyes, a standard in
moment.”
detriment of their toilets. The men began to choose partners and take

Dólokhov turned round and, again holding on with both hands, arranged
the verses.
They said no more. Prince Andrew looked closely into those mirrorlike,
had occurred between them. Whatever her father’s feelings might be,
“There is one thing I wanted to tell you, Princess,” said Rostóv. “It
XIV and Iván the Terrible end their reigns tranquilly, while Louis XVI

inconvenient, unseemly, and impossible to do so.
something may happen to me such as happened to Plutarch’s men, and I
something to him in French in an undertone and then went up to a small

He was proud of her intelligence and goodness, recognized his own

holding up the folds of her dress, and the smile shone still more
    CHAPTER VI
together in a mass. Such action always occurs in wars that take on a
The people of the west moved eastwards to slay their fellow men, and
said another.
“One moment, your excellency.”
the plan of campaign against Napoleon and, having induced Alexander to
having lunch when one can get it.
this bombardment.
To understand, observe, and draw conclusions, man must first of all be
Ilyá has sent you to ask for strawberries and fresh pineapples.’ We
is! It is something new and enchanted. Well, whatever it may be...”
was said.

Borís, with my teacher, and with Denísov, but this is quite different.

and, flushed and smiling, plumped down on the floor. The countess was
“It’s a shame for a soldier to steal; a soldier must be honest,
and with his embroidered red mantle, his flowing feathers, and his
whole trousseau. When they got home she turned everybody out of the room
should return to Moscow to the house on the Vozdvízhenka Street, which
municipality did not stop the robberies and was only of use to certain
things he should have shown it sooner, but he lets it go on for months.
assumed a serious expression.
attain that knowledge and are still infinitely far from our aim; but
the facts of history (as far as we know it) confirm the truth of the
which he found himself. Anna Pávlovna was obviously serving him up as
And I said it so awkwardly and stupidly! I did not say what I meant.
enraptured by her. This pleased her, yet his presence made her feel
designs laws, it is easier writing than doing.”

somewhere beyond them. The hussars did not look round, but at the sound
a Catherine serve to express the life of the nation, which is evident
holding a cigar between the thumb and little finger of one of his small
well enough to be sure that this will not turn your head, but it imposes
the commander in chief speaking but an ordinary old man who wanted to
his own children in the battle? I would not have taken my brother Pétya
connections as a bait to draw rich young men into his gambling set, made


saying something, immediately seized the old man by his legs and the old
so that he should look into hers rather than this. But looking into his
CHAPTER X
a man.”
to cross the Russian frontier, as was the case in 1807!”
them) but on what reminded them most closely of him—his body. Both felt
has received a St. George’s Cross? I am so proud of him.”
remained what he had seemed that first night: an unfathomable, rounded,
Highness would not have it, or someone persuaded him. You see...” but
“Well, what is it? From whom?” he asked immediately but without hurry,
“Have you?” he said. “Well, how did it go?”
the taverns solitary shouts or drunken songs could be heard. Nobody
right! Twenty-one rubles,” he said, pointing to the figure twenty-one
found an expression of his love of her. Occasionally amid these memories
Despite the uneasy glances thrown at her by Princess Mary—who wished
Apart from consciousness of self no observation or application of reason
“On the contrary, I will do what I can. Only I thought...”

deep chest notes. “For me it certainly was happiness.” She paused. “And
arm against the disturber of its peace. All Napoleon’s allies suddenly
knowing how. First he spun her round, holding her now with his left, now
“Márya Dmítrievna! What kind of ice pudding? I don’t like ice

which Napoleon rode, horses and men were lying in pools of blood, singly

Pétya leaped quickly into the saddle unconscious of his own weight and,
that: get rid of falsehood and let war be war and not a game. As it is
“That’s capital!”
“No, Andrew, I must say you have changed. Oh, how you have....”
contradiction to such conjectures. During the whole period of the war
“Vivat!” shouted the Poles, ecstatically, breaking their ranks and

arms and legs and those dead men?... Then again he thought of Lázarev
at the staff and went into hospital.
enemy’s lines of communication between Smolénsk and Vyázma. Denísov came
Prince Andrew asked her something and how she flushed as she replied.
“Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier,” said Prince Andrew.
room. The countess reflected a moment and took a pinch from a gold
had no hair on his head and his features were quite changed. And I said,


Mademoiselle George, with her bare, fat, dimpled arms, and a red shawl
to you? Why doesn’t he come to the house?”
“You will be called in when you are wanted,” he said.
you want to make something out of your company?”
the war. Napoleon nodded condescendingly, as if to say, “I know it’s
“To the Governor’s, as you ordered,” answered the coachman.
roads of Poland, without himself knowing why or whither.
Russian money which he had prepared: “Raising the use of these means
“And because,” Pierre continued, “only one who believes that there is a
from which spectacles have just been removed, had also a frightened and
trepidation in his benefactor’s lifetime. The room, dusty and untouched
was a Pole, disputed with the commissariat officer, arguing that he was
in the Russian service—could do nothing for the prisoners. The French

Napoleon took a lozenge, put it in his mouth, and glanced at his watch.
it under your head like a treasure,” said Rostóv. “I put it just
picked up a book or some sewing, evidently waiting impatiently for the
“Nothing,” said he and turned again to the horses.
of horsemen coming toward them. In front of the group, on a black horse
down in it, and listened to Pierre, coughing discontentedly and frowning
her. Kurágin was much more sensible and simple with women than among
official with a cross hanging on his neck to follow him, and vanished


He spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers could not be sure
Thirdly, it would have been senseless to sacrifice one’s own troops in
had to live and to find occupation. It was too dreadful to be under
What he had just been praying for with confidence that God would hear
stepped away from the man and looked round inquiringly at the adjutant
she understood all the gravity of her friend’s trouble.
From General Wintzingerode’s reports, I see that an enemy corps of ten

which indicates that patience is exhausted.
taken such possession of him, but he remembered nothing of the past,
to the Red Square where some instinct told them they could easily take
“Just so, just so,” repeated the countess, and shaking all over, she
the same submissive attitude. As if inflamed by the sight, he raised his
the attainment of the historic, universal, aims of humanity. A deed done

in God’s hands. You may die in your bed or God may spare you in a
“Well and then?” asked the other voice. “If before that you are
“Ah!... Alpátych... Ah, Yákov Alpátych... Grand! Forgive us for Christ’s
her scarcely defined bosom rising and falling regularly, and with

tousled hair and a happy smile new to Sónya. She ran rapidly toward
and forget that war was impending.

“Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu! Oh!” she heard as she left the room.
    CHAPTER XVI
“I told you that I have no will,” Natásha replied. “Why can’t

“Kurágin! Come back!” shouted Dólokhov. “Betrayed! Back!”
satisfied....”
He went up to the map and speaking rapidly began proving that no
voice which expressed joy for himself, severity for the regiment, and
do everything except what impedes the great aim of our order, which
he will stake his life on it that the enemy will not enter Moscow.”
in the Bazaar and the Povarskóy, as well as the barges on the Moskvá
painstaking effect that had been in it before; but she did not yet sing
typical than any of them. Prince Andrew had never yet seen a German
the government—an activity that in the opinion of the historians was
Raévski had led his two sons onto the dam under terrific fire and had

himself”—and he pointed to Lavrúshka.
Each man lives for himself, using his freedom to attain his personal
the night at an unusual hour would irritate him.
Nor do words alone prove that only he understood the meaning of the

then, was a rubbishy German, that Denísov was a hero, the esaul a hero,
will be forgiven him, for he enjoyed much.”
not jest with them.
and, as usually happens when a man is in a pleasant state of mind,
The princess bent over the exercise book on the table.

rows of stretchers went past, when some troops retreated, and when great
Denísov’s new cloak and saddlecloth.
her table there were extra dishes at dinner, and the servants had vodka
provisions, of which (according to the French historians) there were
had read, and listened to what was passing in the nursery. Suddenly he
the living from the dead lies uncertainty, suffering, and death. And
“No, mon père.”
The rustle of a woman’s dress was heard in the next room. Prince
old head. Planning beforehand what he would say to Kutúzov, Rostopchín
On the Tverskóy Boulevard a familiar voice called to him.
him to come up; Prince Bagratión reined in his horse and recognizing
Soon after Prince Andrew had gone, Princess Mary wrote to her friend
china, bronzes, pictures, and mirrors that had been so carefully
Countess Mary raised her head and tried to speak, but hastily looked
    CHAPTER VI

driving through the town, he saw the Iberian shrine with innumerable
circle and, as he supposed, of similar interests.
and the recent news of his father’s death—and had experienced so many
Adieu, dear and kind friend; may our divine Saviour and His most Holy
     * Hors d’oeuvres.
his day and Natásha danced exquisitely. Her little feet in their white
stranger. This was the Marshal of the Nobility of the district, who
the hope of an alliance with her.
Rostóv’s division, smiled and beckoned to him.
overseers, the peasants on the roads and in the villages—had a new
unexpectedly to go into action. Rostóv without hearing Borís to the
either,” he thought to himself, “I have done nothing wrong. Have I
enemy.
released, the clock began to whirr and the chimes to play. Despite all
it that that scoundrel will not enter Moscow.” These words showed Pierre
acquaintance. Having ridden up to Nicholas, Ilágin raised his beaver

some concessions. Continuing to represent the liberation of the serfs
Pierre flushed and, hurriedly putting his legs down from the bed, bent
and Martinists, even in Novíkov’s time. For a long while after he had

struggled against it. Latterly she had become convinced that she loved
peasants.
field glass and shrugging his shoulders, “so it is! They’ll be fired
them, and so he had left them and wished to pay them out. He said that
The brightness of the morning was magical. Moscow seen from the Poklónny
women with gems on their bare flesh, turned their whole attention with
moment imagined himself to be Napoleon in person and to have just
It is very difficult for events to be reflected in their real strength
concerning his share in the affair—this man did not understand the
going toward the door without raising his eyes. Denísov paused, thought
But having caught himself saying too much about the flints, he was now
a Frenchman), “L’Urope ne sera jamais notre alliée sincère.” *

authorities. ‘I have taken six lives,’ he says (he was a great sinner),
No command ever appears spontaneously, or itself covers a whole series

essential, and after a short interval followed her. Anna Mikháylovna
moments all were silent.


over and began kissing first one knuckle, then the space between the
“Forfeit, forfeit!” cried the militia officer.
militiamen.
“What has happened?” asked Pierre, entering Márya Dmítrievna’s room.
“I hear you have made peace with Turkey?”
prisoners, but kill and be killed! He who has come to this as I have
“Will you have them fetched back?”
then at Tsárevo-Zaymíshche, but it happened that owing to a conjunction
    CHAPTER XVIII
consider my project, so he alone can get it adopted,” thought Prince
those who committed them did not at the time regard as being crimes.
expression for the unknown remainder of what we know about the laws of
“Here it is! The decisive moment has arrived. My turn has come,”

crackled, the snow was melting, and black shadows of soldiers flitted
ordinary staid and respectful good manners habitual in the prince’s
movement of columns on a battlefield never coincides with the plans—the
him, that he was seriously wounded but that his life was not in danger,

“Yes,” replied a footman in a bold loud voice, as if anything were
“According to the scouts the last of them crossed on rafts during the


almost impossible to distinguish anything. Moreover, his whole
was dissatisfied with him. And in a history recently written by order
from the boy.
in the smoke, and the roar of cannon and musketry did not diminish, but
the Emperor Napoleon had resented the demand that he should withdraw his
which forms an impenetrable veil between us and the Eternal? Let us

mother as showing their characters or suggesting general reflections
saving me from that maniac.... You see, I have bullets enough in my

“Then it must be so!” thought Prince Andrew as he drove out of the
observe propriety. It was evident that Kutúzov despised cleverness and
“But, Natásha, can that be all over?”


“And the prisoners he killed in Africa? That was horrible!” said the
it you?’ And the point is that we knew whom he had it from. He could
angry with me for coming? You have changed so, Andrúsha,” she added,
active and clearer than ever, but they acted apart from his will. Most
of the day. Nicholas, who had been visiting some neighbors that morning,
    * “Delighted to see you. I am very glad to see you.”
and kissed it.
a little smoke.”
after vainly hunting all over Moscow, his valet informed him that Prince
conditions on which the will of the people is transferred from some
when Kutúzov would be destroyed and the power pass to Bennigsen, or even



back.
“Hurrah!... Lads!... ours!” shouted Pétya, and giving rein to his

time, hearing the lighthearted French conversation from the next room.
cross it and ride over the black field up the hillside. To keep to the
history.
Recent as that mental picture was, Rostopchín already felt that it had
brought from Switzerland, was wearing a coat of Russian cut and
to it, from Borodinó to Utítsa, at the very place where the battle was


elbow in a broken-down shed in the village of Knyazkóvo at the further
manner were so serious, though she was still holding the ends of her


“How like his father he is,” Pierre interjected.
herself incompetent, but in the depths of her soul she felt at peace—a

degwaded?... Listen, I’m w’iting to them stwaight. This is what I
reproached him for not having stayed at the palace, and offered him
rank—“I thank you for myself and for our two dear ones whose name
“Arínka! Look, she sits sideways! There she sits and her skirt
autumn and which Dessalles called les fils de la Vièrge. In front was

its swollen lips, was more than plain—it was dreadful. But Prince Andrew
princess. (In accordance with Lise’s and Prince Andrew’s wishes they
“Good-by, Princess!” said he.
that I could not have exiled the Postmaster had he not been a harmful


“I could not, on my honor. But how is Pétya?”
Princess Mary noticed to her surprise that during this illness the
has so many relatives in Moscow! So you are Borís? Of course. Well, now
in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the

were heard saying as they gazed on the charred ruins. “All beyond the
of historian to the question of what force causes events to happen are
forgetting that she was dancing with a grown-up partner she bent her
and virtuous parents, a girl the Rostóvs had known from childhood, and
Dmítrievna met him and told him that Natásha had been very unwell the
she had finished speaking to him, and now he continued to speak to
At a moment when all was quiet before the commencement of a song, a door
had been made, the same dispositions, and the same proclamation courte
hero Wittgenstein, this mood and the gossip of the staff reached their
“Where’s the Elder?” demanded Rostóv in a loud voice.

told that the French had been repulsed, the flèches had in fact been
quarters near Braunau, where they hoped to receive boots and clothes and
the court, carefully abstaining from expressing an opinion of his
canvas and, scarcely able to refrain from laughing, stooped as if trying

back, and bosom—which in the fashion of those days were very much

of the city,” explains Count Rostopchín. “Why were bundles of useless

submissive, expressionless look with which he had listened to the
But besides this, since the exhaustion and enormous diminution of the


“Vesénny? Oh, he’s thrown himself down there in the passage. Fast asleep
flourishing his arms.

Those who tried to understand the general course of events and to take
While waiting in the reception room Pierre with weary eyes watched the
“Where are you off to?... Where?...” he shouted to three infantrymen
a written report. Toward midnight Bolkhovítinov, having received the
she could not jump up and run out. The baby again opened his eyes and
old man too came up and kissed the waxen little hands that lay quietly
were of the same age and both handsome fellows, though not alike. Borís
Vílna. In that wealthy town, which had not been injured, he found old
cathedral, and its bridge, on both sides of which streamed jostling
march, rode to his father’s estate where he had been born and spent his
was occupied by the French, a proclamation by a French general that no


son or kinsman.”
the swiftness of Ilágin’s borzois, and in that beautiful bitch saw a
Before he had solved that point he glanced again at her face filled with
starry night was followed by a bright cheerful morning. The snow was
Pierre now recognized in his friend a need with which he was only too
troops from the enemy’s.
fears nothing so much as a general battle is impossible.”
The small group that assembled before dinner in the lofty old-fashioned
the destruction of all their property. In this letter the countess also
(2) His relation to time.
only in so far as this free will is defined by those laws.



After the sufferings he had been enduring, Prince Andrew enjoyed a
soldiers, loudly demanding bread, meat, biscuits, fodder, and whatnot!
forward with unnatural speed but yet stayed on the same spot. From
command can be executed without some preceding order having been given
which she imagined must be the same toward everyone as it was to her.
Drooping in spirit and closing their eyes before the menacing cloud of

plan to Prince Andrew.
felt the doubt, “Is not all I think and believe nonsense?” And
sacrament, allow him a moment’s peace! Here, Pierre, tell them your
dog, coming heaven knows whence, which trotted in a preoccupied manner

It was a gay and brilliant fete. Connoisseurs of such matters declared
“Oh yes, I sent that announcement. But I don’t want to interrupt you,”
Gervais gave a long account of an official revision, remarkable for the
happiness with him she had so often repeated in her imagination, and
“I am sure that rascal was lying,” said the count.


Confessor, she insisted on an answer to the question, in how far was she

“Really, I don’t yet know. I don’t like either the one or the
estrangement, and ridicule with which troops of different arms usually


calm and careless an air as though he were merely out for a ride. He
possible. God preserve us from that terrible misfortune!
ease as though he were in his own room. Around him thronged Moscow’s
“One was damaged,” answered the staff officer, “and the other I
“Are you going to Count Cyril Vladímirovich, my dear?” said the
the changed expression on Prince Bagratión’s face at this moment. It
Man’s actions proceed from his innate character and the motives acting
were not on leash darted after the hounds and the hare. All the hunt,
pomaded hair, perfumed, and in a new uniform, looking just as smart as
“Bah! How they scurry. He just sends a ball and they think they’ll
had all combined to make her decide to release him from his promise and
silence.
or any of the joys of life, and expected peace only “yonder.” She
priding herself on her independence of thought. “God is the same
noticeable one at the dinner. Rostóv looked inimically at Pierre,

Russia in which millions participated, but even in the simplest event,
Another time when she called Dunyásha her voice trembled, so she called

Márya Dmítrievna liked Sundays and knew how to keep them. Her whole

sprang out before the sleigh stopped, and ran into the hall. The house
with her through the garden seeking another way out.
“Yes, he meant to look in,” answered Hélène, and glanced
be given.” To give that terrible order seemed to him equivalent to

how they had been made much of in Russia, Poland, and abroad. They spoke
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
“Ah, and here’s Nicholas!” cried Natásha, running up to him.

Vasíli and his son.
the regiment under a hail of bullets which fell around, but fortunately
soldiers passed in a semicircle round something where the ball had
busy with his roast meat, hoped he had been forgotten: “Didn’t
had been previously enduring were suddenly concentrated at one moment

The second princess had just come from the sickroom with her eyes red
expectation—the feeling that “everything is just the same, so why

eternity.” And again he twisted the screw with the stripped thread,
backwardness compared with Europe only heightened Pierre’s pleasure.
pouch, inside the bosom of his dressing gown and held the stem of his

maids could not say in how far Mademoiselle Bourienne’s statement was
rows of statues in niches) and looking significantly at the lady’s old
a coronet) entered the room, calm and majestic, except that there was
“So then what do you think, Vasíli Dmítrich?” said he to Denísov. “It’s
The handsome young Emperor Alexander, in the uniform of the Horse
of his marriage it had seemed strange to him that his wife should expect
“Whatever trouble may come,” Prince Andrew continued, “I beg
the general, the men themselves not knowing what, or why, they were


profundity of their plans, that he would answer with his phrases (which
and he doesn’t care at all for Julie.”

right to left—maintained their extended position from the village of


seemed to Princess Mary.
her badge as maid of honor. The youthful little Princess Bolkónskaya,
for drawing Borís away, she did not think of that now, and in her own
Anatole.
Dessalles looked in amazement at the prince, who was talking of the
“What are you waiting for? Come along!”

had finished his story someone else was anxious to relate something
drying it at the fire and how they had laughed at him.
    CONTENTS
for a moment on his face on first recognizing Rostóv.
past. Anatole was sitting upright in the classic pose of military
neck, and his head, that had been half shaved, was again covered by
“Ah, Maman, ne dites pas de bêtises. Vous ne comprenez rien. Dans ma
nurse had told him long ago: that God is here and everywhere. In his
With the enemy’s approach to Moscow, the Moscovites’ view of their

seemed to say. She saw her husband, but did not realize the significance
“Do you know I have entrusted him with our secret? I have known him
city with its comforts and plentiful supplies. As a hungry herd of

lain in ambush in a ditch, now attacked the French unexpectedly.
as it seems to him directed his past activity, justify his present
“You see, I took him first thing at dawn,” Tíkhon continued, spreading

and ask him, I!... does that satisfy you?”
when the oak buds unfold, I cannot agree with the peasants that the
Rostóv turned and was about to go, but the man in the braces stopped
slightest variation of note in the cries of the dogs.
“And I tell you—Peter Kirílych here will also tell you...”
of Bonaparte.
was about as five to six, but after that battle it was little more than
she came up fearless and gay to kiss her hand. “I know she’s a scamp

shoulder. “Well, does no one speak French in this establishment?” he

his routine, retired as usual after dinner. The little princess was in
was pale, his blue eyes looked impudently into the commander’s face,


Placing the bottle on the window sill where he could reach it easily,
the war is over, that the Emperor Francis is arranging a meeting with
gradually compelled her to go into details which she feared to recall

globe, and he sank into water so that it closed over his head.
to peasants evoked no response. There were no industrious workmen, and
passed unnoticed.
woman in a pink dress with a lilac silk kerchief on her head, holding
front row of the circle not far from the Rostóvs. Baron Firhoff was



command entrusted to Barclay. But as Barclay did not inspire confidence
a trembling hand placed a charge in the cannon’s mouth. The short,
great deal from the deceased,” said Prince Vasíli to him, handing him
opposition to the government.


weary, making his way past the baggage wagons, rode in search of the
with one another. Again the footmen rushed about, chairs scraped, and
everything, also thought that discussion of the government was a very


questions present themselves: Why did Kutúzov during the retreat not do
the French with his whole army was impossible. The road for the French
reputation—expected to discover in him the perfection of human
“That’s right, my dear,” chimed in the old count, thoroughly
task. He could make nothing of it. Bennigsen stopped speaking and,
alders too are coming out.... But the oaks show no sign yet. Ah, here is
footsteps. Pierre rose and said it was getting late. Prince Vasíli gave
expression which seemed to say that he alone knew where and how much Eau

advancing.”
He mounted and rode toward Semënovsk.
the stretchers, and love of the sun and of life, all merged into one
it is.” And he looked round in the sleigh.
on Stone Island. Michaud, who had never seen Moscow before the campaign

     devil.”
“So they are!” said the officers. “Won’t the soldiers be
Kutúzov glanced inquiringly at him.

general!”
At five in the morning it was still quite dark. The troops of the
“Has he come?” Natásha asked quickly in a whisper, afraid to move lest
distorted out of all likeness to his former self, and the flourishing of

know what would have become of me, because...”
Among those who ventured to doubt the justifiability of the proposed
well as by the proximity of the enemy, resolved to advance. All his men
surpassing beauty in awe and joy.
elsewhere. Order after order and plan after plan were issued by him
“Oh yes, an artful tale! Follow her into slavery! Pull down your houses
sound of the hoofs of the approaching cavalcade, but because as he drew
and Count Rostóv, glancing angrily at the author who went on reading
outgallop him. To ride this horse was a pleasure to him, and he thought

curiosity. Ferapóntov’s wife, who till then had not ceased wailing under
commence the action, and wishing to avert responsibility from himself,
A lump of snow cannot be melted instantaneously. There is a certain
“I only wished to say that ideas that have great results are always
altar on which lay a Testament and a skull. Round it stood seven large
“And are the hours the same? And the walks in the avenues? And the
in Moscow yesterday. Do you know that she has lost her father?”
recollection of their discussion, “he wanted to convince me that it is

“I will give the order.”
that is not yet ready.
He did not see and did not hear how they shot the prisoners who lagged

glancing for support at an officer of the suite who turned away

tighter. The Frenchman was about to say something, when just above their

horses were already galloping. Rostóv heard the thud of their hoofs
downhill in full cry after the hare, and from all sides the borzois that
immediately fell ill. When he came to himself after his illness he saw
“I don’t understand what is meant by ‘a skillful commander,’” replied
Having descended the hill the general after whom Pierre was galloping
should long before have joined Orlóv-Denísov. Excited and vexed by the
ironical, he said:
was struck by the change in him. His words were kindly and there was a
new and unshakable foundations.
And Berg related all that he remembered of the various tales he had
face. They all three of them now experienced that feeling of awkwardness
occupy the position and prepare for an attack.”
It’s too risky to attack them by oneself, and if we put it off till
modern science of strategics, had been handed to Kutúzov when he was in
feel that there was no longer a place for him in life.
event was produced by Napoleon’s power, another that it was produced by
“Oh, please... May I stay with you?” cried Pétya.
The replies this theory gives to historical questions are like the
obligations but also from that feeling which, it seemed to him, he had
a little to their right and behind the accountant, crashed to earth with
swallowing his r’s, and pronouncing the Latin words with a French

Count Rostóv resumed his seat.
and placed alone in a small, ruined, and befouled church.

So thought Prince Andrew as he listened to the talking, and he roused
Otrádnoe, but had never been to see them.
When Princess Mary went to him at the usual hour he was working at his
irrepressible hatred.

repaired. Tradesmen began trading in booths. Cookshops and taverns were
a girl, such tact, such masterly perfection of manner! It comes from
some inspection business,” remarked the visitor.
all quite forgetting the danger and all regard for self-preservation, he
“Come into my study,” said Nicholas.
Napoleon knew that it was only necessary for his hand to deign to touch

“I know! Cyril Matvéich... but he is old.”
indifferently quiescent till the moment when motion is transmitted
his sorrow he only this year quite recovered his spirits. He has again
and down the battery under fire as calmly as if he were on a boulevard,
“I confess I do not understand: perhaps there are diplomatic
Napoleon looked up and down the river, dismounted, and sat down on a log
raised. He remained stubbornly silent, gazing at Weyrother’s face,
conversation.
present, suddenly pushed forward with a scared and angry look and wanted
night.
Prince Vasíli, as he entered. “I know all about it, and I can tell
and diplomatic combinations, laws, and treaties.
greatcoat as if it were a vestment, telling the soldiers in his



myself, “Am I telling the truth?” And suddenly I saw him lying like
head and at the little arms and legs which showed under the blanket. He
the morning amid the lines of his army with his suite of marshals and
The young man in the fur-lined coat, stooping a little, stood in a



I suppose that the nobility have been summoned not merely to express
different, but it was my duty to safeguard my life and dignity as
because his line was not straight, he reached the third company.
quarreled about—I don’t even remember!”
possible and another that a Saxon should be shot, on whom a letter
it.” Natásha smiled and looked at her mother. “Not to marry, but
“What? Occupied? Vienna occupied?”
Countess Mary remained in the sitting room.
other guests were Gervais, Magnítski, and Stolýpin. While still in

chickens, where he engaged in looting till the French took him prisoner.
striking him regularly on his bare back. The man shrieked unnaturally.
subtle smile on his lips and a peaceful look of delight at her beauty,
how to arrange it. What do you think?”
buy something. I went in out of curiosity, you know, and there is a
comrades.
a lift out of Moscow. The major-domo to whom these entreaties were
free and more inevitable to one who knows the mental condition of him
joining in it.
the contrary, the deviations made from his theory were, in his opinion,


     * “I have acted the Emperor long enough; it is time to act
fifteen were lost. Consequently the four were equal to the fifteen, and
The princess did not reply. Their efforts in the struggle for the
to save him from evil and lead him into the path of truth, but evil
grant rewards, and he was himself often surprised at the rapidity of his
the face that emerged from the shirt.
gesture. Anna Pávlovna meditated.
cometh!’”
sickness meant. Every night before lying down, he said: “Lord, lay me
occurred before our fathers’ eyes, and for them it was a question of the
preserved all that was good in it—equality of citizenship and freedom
Her face suddenly flushed with reckless and joyous resolution. She half
our battery it is still bearable,” said the adjutant. “Will you come?”
After the first monologue the whole company rose and surrounded
nobility. He was answered by a voice which informed him of the
now somewhat stiff in the saddle. Chekmár held in leash three


said Dólokhov. “It will be necessary to go there. We can’t start the


a Frenchman beat a Russian soldier cruelly for straying too far from
“Count Rostóv asks you to come to dinner today,” said he, after a
before, interlarding their talk with the same aimless expletives.
On the contrary, just because he happened to be there he thought it one
pronounced some words. Tears, the cause of which she herself did not
remember how she must behave at a ball, and tried to assume the majestic
the grief felt by the subjects he was abandoning, latterly, after he had
people by his strange comments. But at this time he saw everybody—both
flirt with, but dared not even speak smilingly to, any other woman; did

nuts. All these conversations, especially the joking with the girls,

battle and were engaged in peaceful occupations, the cavalry feeding the
through the woods was dangerous and might disorder the division.
“Hm... Hm...” muttered the old prince to himself, finishing what he
marshals, kept galloping up to Napoleon with reports of the progress
said the princess, ignoring his question. “Now I know! Yes; if I have
shoulder, their bayonets interlocking, moved over the bridge in a dense
our youths, look at our ladies! The French are our Gods: Paris is our
On her way past the butler’s pantry she told them to set a samovar,
    * The marshalls.
gave it to Karatáev. “But give me the pieces that are over.”
infantry to the right of the battery came the sound of a drum and shouts

for the life of man is expressed by muscular movements and muscular
“About life, about man’s destiny. It can’t be so. I myself thought
with fever. “If only reserves had come up just then, lads, there
camp, now just visible in the deceptive light of dawn and the dying
consisting of a very handsome old man of Oriental type, wearing a new,
they rose up hungry, joking about their nasty food and their hunger. As
“It’s all nonsense, all rubbish—those discussions which lead to nothing
it was so pretentiously false and unnatural that she first felt ashamed
wishing to rid himself of this staff officer’s company, “please
“O Lord, O Lord! How starry it is! Tremendous! That means a hard

soft snowbanks that bordered both sides of the path. The prince went
could that army—which had found abundant supplies in Moscow and had
plain that he had had a lesson) and stopped behind the count. This
still more rapidly after it, despite Rostopchín’s calls to defend Moscow
intelligent men for his car and send a courier to General Kutúzov to let
regarded himself as a participant and which he was unable to arrest.
Everything seemed so futile and insignificant in comparison with the

Napoleon rode over the plain and surveyed the locality with a profound
Balashëv replied that he had been ordered to hand it personally to the
Prince Andrew looked inquiringly at him and gave no reply.
though it knew that the time of its destruction was near when the
brightening more and more with a rapturous smile as if what he now had
by all legislative codes. The responsibility appears greater or less
giving her instructions how to get to her Aunt Malvíntseva at Vorónezh.

He continually hurt Princess Mary’s feelings and tormented her, but it
in a carved and painted lantern and the intricate, skillful, artistic
of sixteen who had recently joined the regiment, was now in the same
what is beyond death, none of us would be afraid of it. That’s so,
“Why, didn’t you know, Miss?” replied the maid. “The wounded prince: he
which he was accustomed (the honours awarded to Prince Prozoróvski,
seemed to be Poles—all under the Russian crown—but here they’re
lifting his eyebrows, looked at Denísov in affright, but in spite of
though all Pierre’s interest was now centered in that house, by the

It had always seemed to Prince Andrew before that he was antipathetic
could not have a moment’s peace and could not die quietly.
“The Niemen?” repeated Napoleon. “So now you want me to retire beyond
as Frenchmen are, and was, as all Moscow said, an extraordinarily clever
The facts clearly show that Napoleon did not foresee the danger of the
Having finished his second glass of punch, Napoleon went to rest before
“Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!” thundered from all sides, one regiment
the medical treatment, in the depths of her heart she hoped that prayer

“Yes, that’s a difficulty, as education is not at all general,
imperceptibly moving.
household, and the whole family moved from Márya Dmítrievna’s house to
looked through a spyglass at the streams of his troops pouring out of
the best maroon dress, and so on, all would be well. They forgot that
of fire be increased in an abandoned, wooden town where foreign troops
other officers. Perhaps I ought not to have spoken before them, but I am
get ready to dance in the large hall, and the sound of the feet and the
which she had experienced with Kurágin that it never entered her head
we hear is true, it is dreadful. How little we dreamed of such a thing
nothing. She felt that Sónya was speaking the truth, that there was
This man, bent double, rushed past the tradesman and the officer. The


word in it to the best of his ability.)

eyes grew moist. “Hurrah!” cried the three hundred voices again,

some in toys, some in horses, some in politics, some in sport, some
surface, sinks to the depths, and again emerges. There now, Karatáev
Soldiers were passing in a constant stream along the street blocking
not undressed during the first three nights, in order to be ready to
discussed something trivial. They were preparing to go away somewhere.

remember the recent days of patriotic elation and ardor, hard to believe
Pierre dressed hastily and ran out to the porch. Outside all was bright,
of Prussia, in order to draw Borís into the conversation.
keeping the brood warm, he sees the skillful complex structures of the

lying in a corner on the benches beneath the icons, and two others—the
Prince Andrew had often occupied Pierre’s thoughts and now recurred to

with Princess Mary in Boguchárovo. The countess let no occasion slip of

watchman’s hut or it might be a cavern leading to the very depths of
soldiers were in marching kit with knapsacks and shakos that had metal
and character but alike in the social circle to which they belonged.
“Do you know her?” asked Pierre.
the number of our troops and the position in which our army and our
I consider it my duty to let you know of it. He is said to be very

“Shut up!”
in 1812, and the Russian army in its pursuit of the French strained its
the whole story of life. You talk of Bonaparte and his career,” said
pathetic expression of sorrow, prayer, and hope in it. As had occurred
Alexéevich by the elbows back to the door.

those animals flew forty miles? I couldn’t hold them in, my hands grew
in chief, especially at a difficult moment, has always before him not
with the dogs, while from under them could be seen her gray hair and

and groans mingled in a general hubbub, then the firing died down.
seeing blood and hearing cries and groans hurried on, still entangled in
itself not by phrases or by giving one’s children to save the fatherland
When he had changed, poured water over his head, and scented himself,

life.
if it is to last. Prince Vasíli knew this, and having once realized
The princess wished to rise, but the prince held her by the hand. She



Rook—a handsome horse despite its game leg—had the happy air of a

no twigs, leaves had sprouted such as one could hardly believe the old

Vasíli.

and were standing in a semicircle with flushed and animated faces,
totally altered and unexpectedly rapturous and tender expression on
he heard some French spoken he at once began speaking to the officers,
What “still the same” might mean Princess Mary did not ask, but with an

so it is essential to explain what is meant by power.
he would rush through the whole suite of rooms without drawing breath,
being rose in her imagination, and carried her into a totally different
Bezúkhova asked her visitors into the ballroom.
“Turn this way!” he shouted, jumping over the ice which creaked

found, Napoleon also gave instructions that the Polish colonel who
fixed and frightened eyes, crossing themselves, bowed and kissed the old
it. The commander in chief is always in the midst of a series of


you!... forgive!... thank you!...” and tears began to flow from his
giving you the grain to keep you here—that is not true. On the contrary,
that he had entered into his proper position in the province—that of
will be coming,” he was going to say, “to dine,” but changed his
him experienced in the art of war. All their faces looked dejected, and
and aides-de-camp. Berthier, his chief of staff, dropped behind to
depth of his heart. In one place the peasants presented him with bread
now found further confirmation of this surmise. The courtiers explained

possible from the political and clever talk which everyone addressed
    CHAPTER XV
part of a whole of which he was always conscious. His words and actions
“The Emperor! The Emperor!” a sudden cry resounded through the halls and
day in Moscow. All Denísov’s Moscow friends gave him a farewell
Count Ilyá Rostóv had resigned the position of Marshal of the Nobility

be your husband.” (He rose and kissed Véra’s hand, and on the way
might be some caprice of a sick and half-crazy man, or it might relate
heads, terrible and low, a cannon ball whistled, and it seemed to Pierre
evening when the rewards bestowed by the Emperor were mentioned.
there was no holding them in till we reached the place. The devils took
The doctor who attended Pierre and visited him every day, though he
note from Bennigsen who sent personal reports to the Emperor, the wishes


seen you. Very glad! Go back to your rooms, Princess. Go!” said
first period of his service, hard as he tried and much as he reproached
“And if I should meet His Majesty before I meet the commander in
speed before they saw one another—Pierre put out his hands and seized
“There now, Zíkin, they ought to put you on a horse. You’d look
added, “Let the Emperor but say the word and we’ll sacrifice everything
but the corner behind the piano in the sitting room was better than
“Take it right out, or they’ll think I’m holding on,” said

his eyes again and stared vacantly into the darkness around him.
evident that only along that path does the possibility of discovering

Bolkónskaya, very pretty and rosy, though rather too plump for her age.

he pleases, at once assumed her own position to be correct, as she
flush. It was Hélène. Natásha had not time to take off the bodice
that were arriving from Russia. If Kutúzov decided to remain at Krems,
“Good-by, Count,” she said aloud. “I shall look forward very much to
but he could not make up his mind to take the final step. He felt

Without looking at anyone, “Uncle” blew the dust off it and, tapping
fastened to the cording of his uniform and, indicating a bandaged arm,
delicate boy sat with shining eyes unnoticed in a corner, starting

He saw the whips in their red caps galloping along the edge of the
hands, looked attentively into Prince Vasíli’s eyes evidently
followed to check the soldiers and were involuntarily drawn into doing

playing in that monstrous crowd? They compromise him and throw on him
    * Till tomorrow, my dear fellow.

recite them!” said he, evidently preparing to laugh.
placed, and more free to one who does not know that the man was himself
work or by feasting. Two doors led from the room, one straight on into
of the accusations that were being directed against Kutúzov.


a respectable general who has been overlooked in the distribution of


position in the house was such that only by sacrifice could she show her
military action depends not on them, but on the man in the ranks who
where Túshin’s guns were stationed was an unharnessed horse with a

taking her arm led her out to the veranda, soothing her and trying to
CHAPTER XVIII
fourteen, I am only one eighth weaker than he, but when I have exchanged
Mary did not frighten them (she never inspired fear in anyone), but they
the angry whispers of the adjutants who tried to stop him. Kutúzov, his
back to the gate on seeing the carriage driving up. Two women ran out
“I hear,” Dron answered without lifting his eyes.
village. “Very good!” said Bagratión in reply to the officer’s

    CHAPTER VIII
middle of his mouth and with red lips gently inhaled the smoke, letting

and so further increased the fame of these dances. What distinguished
soon as he sank into his place on the sofa after two bottles of Margaux
“If you have nothing better to do, Count (or Prince), and if the

the brood cells. In place of the former close dark circles formed by


conceive a future life...”
observe only the muscular nervous activity, but in man we observe
at them, began to disport themselves in the dark sky: now flaring
important in itself but only as a pretext for disputes and intrigue.
players, or peered at the now cold face of Dólokhov and tried to read
clouded his mother’s face, and he smiled slightly.
all else. He rose and went to the door to bolt and lock it. Everything

different ends of the army did not even resemble what Kutúzov had said,
in my opinion was nothing of the kind. We civilians, as you know, have
his mouth, he turned with his glass to Pierre.
“But you know you may be unfair. You are too fond of this one,” his wife
Owing to the count’s customary carelessness nothing was ready for their
touching his breast. “We can no longer both reign together. I have

general temper of the age produced Napoleon’s power. But Napoleon’s
sciences. Instead of first defining the conceptions of freedom and
of conscience I am feeling now?” she thought.
Rostopchín:

swollen faces, were sitting or walking about in the sunshine in the
come from Moscow; and also his cousin the eldest princess, who had been
good thing really.”
“I assure you that the town of Smolénsk is not in the slightest danger
history supports that view. For instance...” Kutúzov seemed to reflect,
the Emperor Alexander wished for peace, but would not enter into

“To what Mistress? Who are you?” asked Anatole in a breathless whisper.
“What sunshine, Monsieur Kiril!” (Their name for Pierre.) “Eh? Just like
sky hung the full moon. Forests and fields beyond the camp, unseen

a battle, where it is a question of life and death) influence the course

preparing men of firmness and virtue bound together by unity of
“What is it tonight?—But I have to tell you...”
At the men’s end of the table the talk grew more and more animated.
“Again, again!” interrupted Natásha.


crying.
“Hard as this year which delays my happiness will be,” continued
The count came waddling in to see his wife with a rather guilty look as
say: ‘If I had wobbed the Tweasuwy...’”
all expecting it, they are so sure that it will happen that I cannot, I
opened the door of their box. The music sounded louder and through the

conception.
Vasíli’s tone of careless self-assurance that he felt he would be
queer,” he added after a pause, “that you should have suspected

it,” says history.
“Of course it is,” he answered absently. “That’s not the point. I beg

The Pávlograd Hussars were stationed two miles from Braunau. The

which Dunyásha had prepared beforehand.

apathy and egotism.
She wanted to cry. Perónskaya had left them. The count was at the
tried, flogged, and sent to serve as a soldier.
it was not Prince Andrew who was moaning. She knew Prince Andrew was in

there he could see churches that had not been burned. The Krémlin, which
of a war, and Rostóv, conscious of his advantageous position in the
repurchasing Otrádnoe before long, and added: “Another ten years of life
Bilíbin attentively examined his nails, and many of those present
soft hand taking hers firmly, and she touched with her lips a white
CHAPTER XXII
the name of her who could give up Prince Andrew for anyone else.


bowed head.
recognized his lamented and adored monarch.
every glance directed toward her, and tried to appear the same as usual.

silent, morose, and with tear-stained face, everybody pretended not to

unwounded. The soldiers were ascending the hill breathing heavily, and
storeroom to put away what still lay about.

feelings, he frowned and nodded slightly as a sign that Balashëv might

“You have been caught once already by a ‘little girl,’” said
could be heard. Others turned over and warmed themselves, now and again
were to watch Kutúzov’s actions and report upon them.
connected in his memory with Prince Andrew.
Natásha, that winter, had for the first time begun to sing seriously,
“There are two, an officer and a Cossack. But it is not presupposable
that all men, though they understand nothing and are conceited and

phrase, said:
“Is this your saber?” he shouted.
Alpátych collected his parcels, handed them to the coachman who had come

who could therefore be of use to him. He liked Petersburg and despised
jovial old gentleman, who standing beside his tall and stout partner,
that, availing yourself of these circumstances, you might advantageously
affairs of honor and had twice regained his commission.

CHAPTER I

the complete darkness Túshin’s guns moved forward, surrounded by the
had any significance, and that Napoleon himself would be ashamed of them

He explained his wish to be present at the battle and to see the
“No,” she replied, but she had not understood his question.
power. Chance puts the Duc d’Enghien in his hands and unexpectedly

other people who simply found it preferable and more advantageous to


beautiful bosom, on which she readjusted a diamond necklace. From time
cord and went blue behind the ear, and suddenly his face flushed.
words serving as their expression are not what move people—use quite
indicating a handsome officer of the Horse Guards who passed by them

“And then of course my family has also to be considered,” Prince
assumed a grave air and thoughtfully shaking his head said that though
And the latter—unconscious that he was being reflected in the hussar
sent to Formínsk to attack Broussier.
on purpose to vex us. The Archduke Karl does nothing, the Archduke
forever by not asking to remain attached to the sovereign’s person, but
his eyes more than ever he drew himself up still straighter, but did not
“I’ll flatten you into a pancake!” shouted the angry officer to
“Adorable! divine! delicious!” was heard from every side.
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
face assumed a forced unnatural expression as soon as she looked in a
thank me. ‘I am happy when I can do good, but to remedy injustice is

Russians to make an idol of this useless old man, but that he knew whom
by Kutúzov was hurriedly retreating along the Danube, stopping where
freedom we see in any action the less inevitability do we perceive, and
courage. Next he thought that his enemy would send the squadron on a

Dólokhov began to deal seriously. Oh, how Rostóv detested at that
It was all that they could do to get the guns up the rise aided by the
“Oh yes, the war,” he said. “No! What sort of warrior should I make? And
Square with its snow undisturbed by vehicles, the sleigh drivers and

Although Iogel did not acknowledge this to be the real mazurka, everyone
the law of reciprocity comes in, confusing the whole matter. A good

Count Markóv? Count Markóv was the only man who knew how to handle

unhesitatingly believed him.
it right to refuse a duty to which he had been appointed by the Emperor
look and smile that she could not, whilst looking at him, say what she
went up to the harp that stood there in a corner. He took off its cloth
knocking over two horses and another tearing off a munition-wagon
and surely recognized, Lavrúshka was not in the least abashed but merely
Hardly had Prince Andrew started than he stopped him.
Hippolyte in the carriage, “your little princess is very nice, very
that has in its onslaught received a mortal wound, felt that they were

“No, not on any account! I will tell him myself, and you’ll listen


had never before heard Speránski’s famous laugh, and this ringing,
He was not sleepy and it was still not nearly morning. It was impossible
“What? Here? But why did they not blow up the bridge, if it was
seized young Nicholas and he awoke.
resounded. The column moved forward without knowing where and unable,
seeking and vacillating, who had not yet found in Freemasonry a straight
before when she was present, Nicholas went up to her without waiting to
our turn next.”
Pierre shook his head and arms as if attacked by mosquitoes or bees.
It was three o’clock in the morning. The footmen came in with sad and
with emotion:
stopped by Count Rostopchín’s orders, had already in June moved with her


“But when are you coming to bed?” replied another voice.
course and, not finding itself pursued, was naturally drawn toward the

stern eyes on his son.
“You see, my dear... What’s that mess?” she said, pointing to his
that the advantage was now on our side. There was a substantial change
beginning to guess what love is, derived the notion that his father had


Nicholas coughed and said no more. Countess Mary moved away from the
nothing shameful in this reminder. “Call him in. His name is Vincent

“What do you want, sir?” said the doctor. “What do you want?


lifted his head from under his cloak. All was tranquil in the yard. Only
a friend older than himself and whom he respected. His whole time

flank...” here the officer paused. “Well, you see, that’s difficult to
very wise, because you can take everything along with you—vodka and
and was just putting his question to a soldier when his attention
come... he told me himself... but still I should not cry,” and she

She had wanted to conceal what she was writing from him, but at the same

repeat what they had already told her many times: that so-and-so was
officer.”

their arms and offering him a glass of water, but his trembling, swollen

sill, leaned over, and looked down.
dependence had taught her involuntarily to be secretive, having answered

he spoke French. Pierre felt sad at hearing them making fun of him.
what the nobility had been convened for, the talk became undecided and
world a quite different atmosphere, careless, lighthearted, and
soldiers. The company marched on gaily. The soldiers’ voices could be
Pierre remained gloomily silent, answering in monosyllables and
ferocity and for Russians to blame the scoundrel Bonaparte, or later

but he even dreaded to recall them and the bright and boundless horizons

back to Tatárinova had stopped where the service was being held. Pierre
Takes after his father. And he’s hand in glove with Speránski,
That’s enough, please leave off!” Prince Andrew painfully entreated
worthless scoundrel whose whole life could not atone for his crime. He

a fine young fellow must be found as husband for you. That’s it—come
spoke to prove his own rectitude and therefore imagined Kutúzov to be


at Bald Hills.
For several seconds while the young man was taking his place on the step

“What would you have me do?” he said at last. “You know I did all
general—of whom Austria has so many—and to lay down all this heavy


Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latest fashion
and from the fact that some people Pierre knew as the meekest and
the troops moving toward him and has taken up a strong position where

“I go by myself, benefactor,” said Ivánushka, trying to speak in a
     * “It is great.”

out. The fences and gates were new and solid; two fire pumps and a
So it was at Krásnoe, where they expected to find one of the three
“Where have you put it, Wostóv?”

immediately vanished and were replaced by eager excitement. He quickly
wind, and may Thy mighty Angel confound them and put them to flight; may
balaláyka on which someone, who was evidently a master of the art, was
“You are an angel: I am not worthy of you, but I am afraid of
be indubitably man’s highest happiness. Here and now for the first time
army. The brilliant qualities of the soldiers of the army sent to Italy,

stood before a looking glass and brushed the hair on his temples
    * A captain of Cossacks.
the beast: for it is the number of a man; and his number is Six hundred
The fundamental and essential significance of the European events of the
the new wrinkle on his forehead deepened. “Yes, I am well,” he said in
de Cologne should be sprinkled. Napoleon’s short hair was wet and
the wattle fence, and seized hold of it.
There he found so many people, among them officers who, like himself,
The morning after little Nicholas had left, the old prince donned his
haste at the Frenchwoman, her voice breaking: “It’s horrible, vile,

twice a week.
trim, almost like that of peacetime maneuvers, but with a shade of
it back in its place.
are so considerable as not to allow of your taking the offensive? On the
second time. But Pierre was so absorbed that he did not understand what

Pierre were borne along lightly and joyously, nearer and nearer to their
was charmant. Even if Anna Pávlovna did not say so, he could see that
her. When he appeared at the door she grew flurried, evidently undecided
forward, and experienced great happiness.
reason for rejoicing, they looked at each other with joyful delight and
Pétya’s mind and he galloped on to the place from which the rapid firing
Nicholas, but had never learned music or thought about it, and so the
says,” voices in the crowd were heard saying.

    CHAPTER III
“But tell me, what is he like, eh?” said Prince Andrew again.
and she seized the countess’ hands and kissed a knuckle of the little
“And the old man said, ‘God will forgive you, we are all sinners in His
“And it had to happen that he should come specially to Petersburg
We need only confess that we do not know the purpose of the European

miles from Boguchárovo to where the road was occupied by our troops. At
cheerful. “What’s the good of making so much of it? Things are nice



“What about your master?” he asked Lavrúshka, Denísov’s orderly,
woman, you bow down too; and you, grandchildren, also bow down before
CHAPTER XV


“Let us go, Iván Lukích,” he said to the captain.
killed tomorrow... That I should not exist... That all this should still
captivity was gradually led on to do so.
While the service was proceeding in the Cathedral of the Assumption—it
Natásha’s reputation.

at Pierre but Pierre was no longer there. In his place was his
neighboring wheel is as quiet and motionless as though it were prepared
hastily that the Frenchmen with the wagons had all been killed; only a
or discord in the family that has been so good to me (she wrote), and my

“How is the count? Can I see him?” asked Pierre, awkwardly as usual,
in all his activity he was never once untrue to it?
in society mostly as weak and insignificant men. Under the Masonic
rising up in her for the whole household, because they were always the
“Fine men!” remarked Napoleon, looking at a dead Russian grenadier,
mist!”
and screamed hoarsely, evidently with some heroic fancy in his head.
he was apt to succumb. He felt that everything was now at an end, all
What would Sónya and the count and countess have done, how would they
may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
but very early we said to ourselves that we were losing the battle,



a letter of recommendation he had brought from Pierre had become
monogram were displayed, and the Polish ladies, welcoming him, waved
The general had a fit of coughing as a result of shouting and of the
comet, 666, L’Empereur Napoléon, and L’russe Besuhof—all this had to
often heard. “What is this?” thought Prince Andrew approaching the
because he liked the things they liked. With others Balagá bargained,
Bagratión’s exhausted troops some rest, and letting the transport and
drink shop or fall ill. Just as I could not stand his terrible physical
known and always slightly feared. He was in a woman’s dress, with
nonsense, but it would in fact have been difficult to give any other
and bent over him.
of timidity and submission. On seeing his daughter he moved his helpless
of large parties—one a Pole and the other a German—sent invitations
sin, for you acted without evil intention. If now you married again

forget all that.... She says: ‘I shall love him always, but let him be

and the pistols loaded, Nesvítski went up to Pierre.
already opening a door.
Prince Andrew, seeing that his father insisted, began—at first
“Why didn’t you capture one, just one, marshal for us?”

Bourienne aroused her. She raised her eyes, and two steps away saw

notice it at all and naïvely asked Balashëv through what towns the
“It’s nothing,” replied Prince Andrew.
“And tell Mr. Dólokhov that I won’t forget him—he may be quite
“Why this delay? Why no betrothal?” he thought. Once, when he had
over to the new one and by their hum drowned and obscured the voices of
His father announced to him that he would now pay half his debts for the
spreading out before him the plan of the new building and fixing his
“Tell them to give me a seat, for God’s sake!”

her leave the village: that there was an order not to move, and that
to leave the children such beggars as I was.”

a single hair of our heads will fall without His will. And His will is
to him. He could not tell them simply that everyone went at a trot and
“How is it you didn’t go head over heels?” asked the boldest of
He did not find Prince Andrew in Olmütz that day, but the appearance of
the realms of Russia with death-bearing terrors; humble Faith, the sling
“The step must be taken but I cannot, I cannot!” thought Pierre,

“Done for!” he said with a frown, and went to the gate to meet Denísov
to show him the way.
Emperor,” said Rostóv, and was about to spur his horse.
“Do you or do you not know where that will is?” insisted Prince
“Then you are Russians?” the peasant asked again.
but also for his skill in dealing and conversing with those in the


to work two cases were standing open in the ballroom, one almost full
themselves along the Vozdvízhenka, the Nikólski, and the Tverskóy
dominated everything else and soared above all their affected chatter.
as he closed his eyes his ears seemed filled with the rattle of the

and mirth that shone in all their faces. Evidently in the back rooms,
Prussia, and had just returned from there as a special messenger. He had
Rostóv ran after him with the crowd.
you yourself reported to Count Buxhöwden yesterday, you must think of
to justify herself. “You have not understood me, Nikólenka. It is
like this when he entered the day before he could not for a moment have
again, be magnanimous, and so on?... Yes, that would be very noble, but
not rise. Rostóv also tried to rise but fell back, his sabretache
decaying leaves and of dog. Mílka, a black-spotted, broad-haunched

relating to the court.
Lise. I will follow.”

now they were all bluish, lit up, and glittering with frost or dew.
horse a little in front of his marshals. He gazed silently at the hills
believe, and said, ‘The monks cheat,’ and as soon as he’d said it
than previous ones because the battle of Borodinó was the first Napoleon
him every time he moved. This man was doing something to his legs in the
smile. “I had heard about you from my page, Drubetskóy. Have you
about his relations and his financial and family affairs, “ma pauvre
respect, he had decided that it would be a good thing to set fire to the
obeying, and suddenly doubts arose in his mind. “Where am I? What am
“How good! Really very good!” said Nicholas with some unintentional


forward. “It’s in my ears. But perhaps it’s music of my own. Well, go
you, Mademoiselle Sophie, whatever may happen, to turn to him alone for
his protection stopped him. The firing was still proceeding when
of him.
The more emotional and ingratiating the expression of Natásha’s face
no time. I hope, my dear friend, you will carry out your father’s
he did not do as he was told? Balashëv mentioned who he was. The
returning to the town. The commander in chief made a sign that the
times repulsed. In the center the French had not got beyond Borodinó,
times has been presented in its whole tremendous significance.
toward which he moved throughout the whole war. Obviously in spite of
the princess noticed all that was going on around her and felt the
they made a dash for the Kalúga road, and (after a victory—for at
Previously he had talked a great deal, grew excited when he talked, and
“You spoke to me of inflammable material,” said he, “but you said
Military Settlement. We join hands only for the public welfare and the
would be a relief. He would give me advice.”
of all his family’s efforts to console him, he could not forgive
“She is a very admirable and excellent young woman,” said she, “and you
insurrection ever occur when the enemy entered a town. More than
for an instant, but there was no second report as he had expected. He
“If they had known that you wished it, the entertainment would have

That Napoleon agreed with Mouton, and that the army retreated, does
feeling her heart beating quickly and violently. “Drónushka tells me
the cheerful glitter of that autumn day was in keeping with the news of
morning he became quiet and she fell asleep.


“You say you can’t see a reign of goodness and truth on earth. Nor
“What swells they are! Why, the water streams from them! Don’t make our
card, putting a small stake on it, and beginning to play.

“It’s all the same to him,” he muttered, turning quickly to a soldier

after the attack, Bogdánich would come up to him as he lay wounded and
Dólokhov began laughing.
attributing to it qualities of genius it does not possess. The best

haze. It grew light. The evening was ending, but the night had not yet

a blue-eyed soldier involuntarily attracted notice. It was Dólokhov
the very end?” Princess Mary sometimes thought. Night and day, hardly
the little princess. She felt, as courtiers do when the Tsar enters, the
it reached Vílna it numbered only fifty thousand, and at Kálisch less
“Isn’t she too young? I have heard that it harms the voice to train

least disconcerted by this reception. He had just entered, wearing an

“Well, good-by, your excellency, keep well!” said Rostopchín,
“Of course, it is a very brilliant match, but happiness, my dear...”
a moment and is a probation; yet we cling to it and think to find
today, and that his excellency was not receiving anyone.
Pierre’s gloomy, unhappy look struck her. She stopped in front of him.
anyone. They wished to administer the sacrament of unction.”
said then but only spoke now: “I love thee!... thee! I love, love...”

dance.
night long without closing their eyes, while the adjutants and
That same night, Rostóv was with a platoon on skirmishing duty in front
Dólokhov reined in his horse and advanced at a walk.
fortification.
those who examine the actions of any government have always said since
“She kept begging to go away. She’s a woman! ‘Take me away,’ says she,

her hand did not reach them. Pétya pushed her hand away with his knee,
minuteness.

“To Petersburg? Go there? Very well, I’ll go. But I may come again



the old interests of her carefree girlish life that had been so full

     fate—(the fate of the army at Ulm).”
Bagratión’s detachment was reunited to Kutúzov’s army.
magnanimity of Prince Andrew who when he went abroad had given her her

that could save the army, and how he alone would be entrusted with the
down below, but higher up at the village of Schlappanitz where Napoleon

helter-skelter from the wood opposite and the whole pack rushed across
at ease by him, “but I hope I have not offended you. I always make it

them. Am I right or not? Won’t that be best?”
and finally wrote him, but nothing would induce him to consent. I swear
than once. “You know it won’t do to leave your posts like this.
“What are your commands, little countess?”

with Dessalles or by himself, recall and reconsider the meaning of
love with a man who would perhaps never love her, she comforted herself

from that distorted mouth issued an indistinct, hoarse sound. Anna
flower; Natásha, half grown up and half child, was now childishly

carried away by passion. Oh, only my poor mother...”
with quite new eyes. It seemed to him that it was only today, thanks
looks up to? Can it be true? Can it be true that there can be no

on him. I am not a man, that I should repay kindness with ingratitude!

Denísov was shouting. “And I saw with my own eyes how Lazarchúk
nothing, but here on the one hand the local nobility have done me the
I’ll see.” The old prince snorted. “Let her marry, it’s all the
“Well, and you, young man,” said he. “How do you feel, mon
“Yes, but he’s wonderful.”
“How can you speak so!” he blushingly replied to Princess Mary’s
believe everything you’re told. You were told...” Hélène laughed,
Moscow), but a new battlefield which would probably prove sanguinary.
atmosphere that the eyes smart, when the lungs are strengthened and
looked at Natásha, “say what you like, it’s still too long.”
“You always dance. I have a protégée, the young Rostóva, here. Ask
explained by the activity of Louis XIV, XV, and XVI, their mistresses
“Give it to him, then,” said Anatole.
The old count went home, and Natásha and Pétya promised to return very
Our family life goes on in the old way except for my brother Andrew’s
Almighty painted with a scepter in one hand and an orb in the other.
army aroused that horror in Napoleon. He sat silently on a campstool
is my witness,” and she made the sign of the cross, “I love her so

When Natásha had been told that morning that Prince Andrew was seriously
labor was thus increased, though lessened on paper. He did not know
princess with the expression women assume when they suppose they are
    * Daughter of Matthew.
intently watching what was going on a few steps away. He was looking at
who stood ready to assist him.
opened the door which moved noiselessly and easily. She paused at the
“To the Committee on Army Regulations, and I have recommended that

Denísov himself intended going with the esaul and Pétya to the edge of
glad my brother has found happiness....”
goodness, and truth are absent.



hand them to the Emperor after my death. Now here is a Lombard bond
was firm, or because England’s policy was astute or the Duke of
expression on his face changed in a way evidently deliberate and
to me free; but asking myself whether I could raise my arm in every
peculiar to pregnant women. It was evident that her eyes did not see

the harp and to play only the guitar. She asked “Uncle” for his

Bourienne says he has been asking about you....”
nothing certain was known about it, partly because there was a vague

conviction. “He’s laughing.”
been through so much in life. I am afraid for you, you do not yet know
Kaiser Alexander hoch!” *(2) said he, quoting words often repeated by
Nicholas, though he had never seen Ilágin, with his usual absence
rich and deserted city resulted in fires and looting and the destruction
forced him to marry his daughter. Anatole had very soon abandoned his

profitable source of income.

hungry, ill-shod soldiers, and losing a third of his men as stragglers

looking up from under a sable hood, was still sitting there, and that

out as a post horse, but still I must have a talk with you, Catiche, a
horses in horsecloths. Then came a cart, and behind that walked an old,
“Well, I think it is. The bigwigs here think so too, but they
roundabout way Princess Mary was obliged to take through Lípetsk,

between Mikúlino and Shámshevo there were large forests, extending in
peasant who, more dead than alive, was already hurrying out of his way.

represented as a great deed. The most suitable fête the Germans can

left?” thought Nicholas. “Are we getting to the Melyukóvs’? Is
a responsibility for my every word and deed? Yes, but what did he ask


speak and act apart from her own will. From the time Rostóv entered, her

“Oh, it’s wetched! Well, what are you standing there for, you
to the costume tournament, Countess? Do come!” and putting out his
shall reproach my wife with anything, and I cannot reproach myself
said he had seen Ermólov ride past with some other generals, others said

were brothers.
“You know, I adore little girls, they lose their heads at once,”
voices, and the army swayed and started in one enormous mass six miles
bare feet. The boards of the floor creaked. Stepping cautiously from one
CHAPTER X
changed: her eyes became fixed, and then a shiver passed down her broad
him, he does not know Russian.”


paying no attention to the varying quality of the pasturage in different
of Tíkhon and the doctor when they turned him over. Several times she

to demean his dignity and felt the necessity of replying; but, as a man,
was particularly pleasant at that moment. They had reached the battery


Natásha entered with a softened and agitated expression of face and
and placed a bottle of claret in it. He also brought a bottle of kvass,
the ballroom with his heavy waddling gait, he was arrested by someone’s

to persuade her to get away as quickly as possible, and the head of the

attack with music and with drums beating, and killed and lost thousands
employ dangerous remedies.

the enemy’s fires, but heard the shouting of the French more loudly

to the shanty.
subject; Bennigsen, rather more of a soldier than the others, but all
Europe, led them to the goal.

perfection of Oriental beauty, with her sharply outlined, arched,
“What are ‘God’s folk’?” asked Pierre.
“Do I remember Nicholas?”

Prince Andrew was one of those rare staff officers whose chief interest
memory, I will do the impossible—your son shall be transferred to the
Bagratión. His idea was, first, to concentrate all the artillery in the
“Take care, you’ll fall out.”
Anatole and Pierre.
under present circumstances a formal betrothal was, of course, not to be
conversations, the count at last devised means to tranquillize her. He
according to the enemy’s movements and the number of men increases and
French. But this adjutant returned half an hour later with the news that

wake up, Váska!” he went on, turning to Denísov, whose head


“From whom did you get this?” she asked.
destroyed the French, and to him belongs the credit for taking the first
After the rapture of meeting, and after that odd feeling of unsatisfied
or less forcible and correct.
“Father! Benefactor! God has sent you!” exclaimed deeply moved voices as
disorder and was retreating upon the Kiev grenadiers. Prince Bagratión
    CHAPTER V
difficult for artillery and cavalry to retire. Prince Andrew took
with its legs in the air, sat a peasant woman uttering piercing and
cross round his neck, approached the speaker.
    CHAPTER III
of it gets made or because people try to exchange it for gold, so also
Not expecting to come on the enemy down by the stream, and having
saddle girths were too slack, reproved him, and mounted. Pétya put his
and the unpopularity of the foreign commander in chief, there resulted

So they went through their memories, smiling with pleasure: not the sad
alarm with their abdomens raised, and ready to die in defense of the
Rostóv family, many fears that the invitation would not arrive, that
that if he asked on behalf of all who begged of him, he would soon be
word, “and you believed it! Well, what have you proved? What does this
Some swarthy men and women were really entering from the cold outside
questioning him about the matter in hand. Denísov told him of the


knew that after his promise to Sónya it would be what he deemed base to
awaiting her and drawing near had not terrified her, just as the mere
along to the colonel,’ I said. He starts yelling, and suddenly there
She pulled up her muslin sleeve and showed him a red scar on her long,

herself as she did with others and had shown him only the combative side

Above the heights was the dark clear sky, and to the right the vast orb
“Fine young fellow! Fine young fellow!” he said. “Well, come and

the serious faces of those around, remembered all he had already gone
“Very lovely,” said Prince Andrew.
at his expense, and a priest was paid to teach reading and writing to
flurry—for to her it was a matter of routine. Her ugly old body was
conquerors were masters in it and were patronizing him. Painful as
the carriage beside the countess and gazing at the slowly receding
criticized—criticized for their very perfection, for their excessive
he spread a map on the table. “All eventualities have been foreseen.
of the Emperor’s house.
The handsome Véra, who produced such an irritating and unpleasant
and so sparkling their eyes. Sometimes the best of the pupils, of whom
Ivánovich and now for Tíkhon or Dron. Dunyásha, the nurse, and the other
something that had been forgotten, and even after that he would again
The young fellow on the box jumped down to hold the horses and Anatole
said the old man, “say so, my dear sir.” And he suddenly smiled, in
“Why are you so glum?” asked Nesvítski noticing Prince Andrew’s

each occasion had been driven back by grapeshot from the four isolated
his future depended—whether he would follow the same old road, or that
feeling stronger than friendship sprang up between them; an exclusive
men at Borodinó was not due to Napoleon’s will, though he ordered the
Cold shivers ran down his spine and his whole body pulsed rhythmically.
reciprocated this antipathy, but it was overpowered by his contempt
general conversation.
eating! I think that punishment by depriving children of sweets only
having given them to the rosy Natásha, who beamed with the pleasure

life in the countess’ house had grown harder and harder, especially
every step.
life is destroyed.
no longer a young diplomat, as he had entered the service at the age
consider yourself incapable and your life a spoiled life. You have
the tall lad were drinking in the dramshop that morning, had brought the
them we find; and each separate cause or whole series of causes appears
The Cossack was sent for and questioned. The Cossack officers wished
was taciturn, and the old prince noticing this also became morosely dumb
had against his will more than once entered his head. For himself
borzois! That’s it, come on! Yours are worth thousands. Try yours
Dólokhov or answering him. The footman, who was distributing leaflets
mysterious forces that move humanity (mysterious because the laws of
took to be the enemy. Shots could be heard, but some way off.
“But that’s not Mytíshchi, it’s farther away.”
the French army was beaten and preparing for flight. But these were

have their limits and that those limits are very near together; that the
expulsion of the French proved that the winning of a battle does not
Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to
Natásha sat down and, without joining in Borís’ conversation with
banging the table with a determined and drunken gesture and preparing to
“Nastásya Ivánovna, what sort of children shall I have?” she asked

looked at him with her beautiful radiant eyes and seemed to say, “I
same feelings. All their faces were now shining with that latent warmth
I’ll find you another place.”
shelters with merry chatter and laughter; around the fires sat others,

turned to the right and came out onto the highroad at Krásnoe. And here
manly voice interrupting them both. “Of course you artillery men are
someone cried.

on earth: toiling, suffering, struggling, and harming one another, to
the princess did speak, her words would not be flattering to Anna
Bourienne. Princess Mary felt his look with a painfully joyous emotion.
whom had his face covered with sores, were tearing a piece of raw
“Lise!” said Prince Andrew dryly, raising his voice to the pitch
“No, I know all is over,” she said hurriedly. “No, that can never be.
one of those who sympathized with his plans and ought to rejoice at




something terrible.
be shaken in her determination.
have armed themselves in Thy Name, and gird their loins with strength
but most of the gentry were strolling about the room.
excuse his costume.

    CHAPTER XXVI
The old countess, not letting go of his hand and kissing it every
bad humor, it seemed to him that everyone regarded him with aversion

horse and his Mameluke, Rustan. Napoleon received Balashëv in the very

and Prussia. And there too he killed a great many. In Russia there

Kolochá, presents itself as obvious for an army whose object was to
   Triumph, valiant Russians, now!...
There was so much good nature and nobility (in the French sense of the

the time Achilles has covered the distance that separated him from the
Afterwards in the evening when I gave him his ticket, he again began
seemingly increased in inverse proportion to the square of the distance
came a solitary human cry from the gateway and amid the smoke appeared
    CHAPTER VI

Mary. She got up and, almost crying, began to arrange her wallet. She
    CHAPTER XV
gone, Pierre did not go to bed or order horses but paced up and down
He left the room and went to the waiting room where Alpátych stood with
there would be no restrictions. Rumors of the war with Bonaparte and
those on foot, collapsed in a great mass, and some forty men who were on
forces they are obliged to admit, in addition to the insufficient
“Yes, and some wine,” answered the captain.
the pale face and shining eyes of the very Natásha of whom he had just
was the little princess, these tears, the cause of which she did not

make a career and must not miss opportunities, but must avail myself of
“Mot d’ordre,” repeated the sentinel, barring the way and not replying.
they’ll say so again and again, and that will be the end of it. My

third couple. Borís, coolly looking at Hélène’s dazzling bare shoulders
audience, seeking in them the same sense of ridicule and perplexity she
“I never could understand how Nataly made up her mind to marry that
vigorous and alert, entering Potëmkin’s gaily colored tent, and a
“See what you believed in! This is he! Do you now see that it was not he

his smile, manly and yet childlike.... No, I had better not think of
All the rest of that day Pierre spent alone in his benefactor’s study,
He embraced Prince Andrew, pressing him to his fat breast, and for some
Next day Anatole left for Petersburg.
“Very silly,” said Véra. “I am ashamed of you. Secrets indeed!”

cloak looking timidly at me,” he thought. “And what does she
and with a severe expression sailed back to her table in the sitting
and yet more were heard mingling with and overtaking one another.
obstinate. I tried threats, but he only grew angrier. Then I took the
all the same, to the next house which seemed to them better. Many of
on our army, and as for him, he ought, it seems to me, not to live. If

22nd instant, and both armies with their united forces will defend our
struck everyone by his preoccupied, absent-minded, and morose air.
had promised Bolkónski. He was glad I was free to refuse him.”
in his constant comings and goings between the two camps became confused
Kozlóvski, who was sitting at the window with a book.
that Frenchwoman.”
arm with the sleeve turned up to the elbow, trying unnaturally to spread
him and telling how he had blushed when Princess Mary’s name was
rays of the sun beat down vertically and a fresh soft wind played with

Lázarev sat in the place of honor. Russian and French officers embraced
Natásha did not follow the golden rule advocated by clever folk,
Bergs beneath her, could be cruel enough to refuse such an invitation.
Denísov were his worst enemy, firmly fixed his eyes directly on his
Pierre took her outstretched hand and kissed it awkwardly as he walked
added, addressing Prince Vasíli, and without waiting for an answer she
“The law, religion... What have they been invented for if they can’t
thing there. He stood still, looking silently around. He had not at all

peasants’ needs and what there was in Boguchárovo that belonged to the
conversation from changing its ordinary character of gossip about the

“And do you remember,” Natásha asked with a pensive smile, “how
the most intimate friend of the Bezúkhov household since Hélène’s
“And if he asks about the losses?”
children who were with the French transport, all—carried on by vis
gladly regarded the ever-changing, eternally great, unfathomable, and
able to do.
little towns there’s nowhere to spend it,” said he. “Well, let me
the subjection of personality to the laws of space, time, and cause
“I have.”


forward and back to save himself from falling. An old, noncommissioned

chessplayer having lost a game is sincerely convinced that his loss
I feel at peace and settled. I know that no better man than he exists,
Toward the end of the battle of Borodinó, Pierre, having run down
officer pointing to the soldiers. “The officers don’t keep them in
only tacked together, and was turning her head to see in the glass how
Russian, “because I have a detestation for all the French, and the
about Paris and about some changes he meant to make in the Empress’
As Pierre approached that street the smoke became denser and denser—he
Princess Mary admitted to one another that the angel’s face reminded
I ask you to go with all your belongings to our estate near Moscow, and
with the old prince.”
irreproachable idleness.
electronic works
his study. “A wonderful talent!” he said to Prince Andrew, and
She began blinking rapidly and moved away from the looking glasses.
have not quitted Moscow.”

Dmítri, a man of good family who had been brought up in the count’s
possible. Kutúzov himself with all his transport took the road to
and his lips were smiling. Though the commander was occupied in giving


solution of the problem, but never reach it. Only when we have admitted
questioning look.
speed.
knapsacks conveyed on carts, and the Austrian authorities had provided
Andrew felt a pleasant sense of repose among luxurious surroundings such
“Come along with me to our knoll. We can get a view from there and in
murmurs were heard, there was a sense of confusion, and finally a
said inquiringly.
years before from the mortification to which his wife had subjected him

coiled it up and immediately set to work on the other leg, glancing up

and as soon as they reached the top of the incline turned round and
was fonder than ever of Mary, and how Mary was in every way better than
This Kutúzov knew well.


The little princess lay supported by pillows, with a white cap on her
Natásha did not reply, nor did she sob any longer, but she grew cold
only consolation was the fact that the princess allowed her to share her
chief’s and with the exception of Prince Bagratión, who declined to
being dragged away and the wounded carried off.
conceal her delight. “She is so kind and Mamma is so fond of her!”
“Yes, just fancy...”
and complacently seated himself on the sofa.
“Quite right,” said the Englishman.
not the French were running after them, but not daring to.
pillage his dearly beloved Bald Hills which he had built and peopled.
into the house. Alpátych, having sent his family away, was alone at
The whole letter breathed loving rapture for his betrothed and tender
Kutúzov no one spoke of, except some who abused him in whispers,
He did not finish. Just then there was a whistle in the air; nearer and
a pistol, confiding to him his intentions of remaining in Joseph
“I am speaking, Prince, of the Emperor Napoleon,” he replied. The
attention to her severe remark—and began to laugh. She laughed, and in
Andrew’s fiancée. A bright questioning light shone in her eyes, and on


“Don’t answer like that, my good girl!” she said. “What I say is
it was the petition to the Emperor drawn up by the auditor, in
“Come now, what about your Roi de Prusse?”
“There it is!... It again!...” said Pierre to himself, and an
instructions.
“I bestow it with pleasure,” said Napoleon. “And who is that young
“What was he thinking when he uttered that word? What is he thinking
toil, clinging to one another’s legs and drawing out the wax, with a
added: “What a lot of men have been crippled today—frightful!”

“Wait?... Hurrah-ah-ah!” shouted Pétya, and without pausing a moment
you?” said the old prince to Prince Vasíli.
know! The Prussians are up in arms now. The Austrians, you see, are
I can’t bear this waiting and I shall cry in a minute!” and she


that was as yet burning only at one end, just below the roof, and around

all went away silently and with drooping heads.
resolute and triumphant steps between the French soldiers.
coming. I’ll come out to you in a moment, but we must first settle
hints began to make the countess anxious and she glanced uneasily at
fear.
Napoleon. They did not fear getting into trouble for not fulfilling


    CHAPTER XII
“Oh! Oh! Oh!” groaned Kutúzov despairingly and looked around....
asked one of the ladies.
attack the French right wing.
guessing Rostóv’s thought.
that he was indifferent, because something else, much more important,
The discussion recommenced, but pauses frequently occurred and they all
had happened. What had happened? Nothing. He had merely understood that
thought also of her own children. She did not compare them with him, but
as usual in the middle of the hall and choosing the place where the
up, sighed, and sat down again on his heap of straw. “That’s the way.
exactitude, what minuteness, what knowledge of the locality, what
to himself. It was around him that the people chiefly crowded, expecting
Andrew... is Father’s way of treating religious subjects. I don’t
more! Some more!” a merry voice was saying in his soul. But no more
been shaved for a soldier, Michael would have had to go.’ called us
will of God; you cannot escape from Him. And they are simple. They do

and the second aim, that of purifying and regenerating himself, did not
had misfortunes, but he is a man. He knows what’s what.... If he wants


laws of statistics, geography, political economy, comparative philology,
the knoll.
“Only I feel afraid in his presence. I am always afraid when I’m
a ‘corner’ and the stakes at cards meant, but carrying forward to
sores immediately turned away and went on with what he was doing.
language, came out of the drink shop, and, under the sign of the
His dressing gown was unfastened, his face red and distorted. He
All that may be so and mankind is ready to agree with it, but it is not
an earth saturated by autumn rains. The verdure had thickened and its
current in town she learned how the Rostóvs were situated, and how “the

at irregular intervals as before, followed by one or two cannon shots,
anxious about him. His health was better in the winter, but last spring
a long time and did not recall the past, but as Hélène was enjoying

meaningless words that happened to enter his head.
From all sides reports reach me,” etc.
personally, but the project will speak for itself.”
They’ll ransack that castle,” he remarked with evident approval.
“How do you know?”
Sónya passing with a glass in her hand. “Yes it was exactly the
men’s moral responsibilities from their path.
undecided on the matter himself, eventually left the visitor to settle
He had in the highest degree a practical tenacity which Pierre lacked,
paced the room with her. There was an expression of carefree happiness
“Do you know, Mary, what I’ve been thinking?” he began, immediately
If there be a single law governing the actions of men, free will cannot
purple face, reporting something.
her husband. It was not what he was saying that pleased her—that did not
    CHAPTER III
arms and the hope of future triumph. And he was not the only man to
She took his arm and with a happy face went with him into the adjoining
on all sides. The countess rose and went into the ballroom.
nearer, faster and louder, louder and faster, a cannon ball, as if it
the orders were to abandon the wounded, many of them dragged themselves
officials, simply asked for pardon.
having hinted that he would burn Moscow and now repudiated the deed;
envious looks which had followed him out from both sides, and the face
Her face became sad.
instructions to the steward who had been waiting for him, went to the

efforts beyond their strength laboriously drag away a dead bee or

during their retreat it was their native land. But that native land
circumspect silence of people who are leaving, after a funeral.
who stood behind him. “Brigand! Get away!”
he twirled his mustache, all now seemed offensive. “I will go away
are we? Men. How is it you know everything? Why do I alone not see what
daughter.)—“My dear boy... Lëlya... I am very pleased.” (His
commit nuisances in all the courtyards and even under the very windows
Not only did Prince Andrew know he would die, but he felt that he was
recognized as legitimate; so that he is now Count Bezúkhov and
Bezúkhov’s house that night had gathered to fortify themselves.

again glanced at Natásha, and a still-deeper flush suffused his face and
pulling him by the chain and trying to set him at the others.

either that Napoleon was a great genius, or that Louis XIV was very
veteran could have produced.
weaker than a company. The relative strength of bodies of troops can
For the French retreating along the old Smolénsk road, the final
“Eh, eh, friend! Come here a bit,” said she, assuming a soft high
before and the path to the hothouse, along which the prince was in the

one at Borodinó.

“That’s grand, it bucks one up!” laughed the first. “Lucky you jumped
were especially striking. For the most part they sat quietly in their
the potato.

series of events, and corresponding with this generalization the whole
nose and her head flung back, stood in the hall doorway looking with
serious for an instant at the sight of her, but immediately smiling
“They must be feeling dull, too,” said one of the bolder officers,
Kutúzov, there is not a single Russian in command of a column! The
“Listen, Bilíbin,” said Hélène (she always called friends of that sort
circumstantially and with evident satisfaction.
“The prince wants to bathe.”
glass.
CHAPTER XVI

your sorrow, and that for you I am not a Serene Highness, nor a prince,
movement also.
the cannon the men moved still more briskly and busily. No one any
In the long room, brightly lit up by the sun through the large windows,
the hair of the bared heads and with the ribbons decorating the icon.

    CHAPTER V
be pictured, and of whom he never thought without a swelling heart and
the bench and the lieutenant colonel sat down beside him.

     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
and also very few domestic or literate serfs, and in the lives of the

Officious hands, Russian and French, immediately seized the cross and
her over his spectacles.
to Kutúzov. The plan was based on the fact that the French line
But the princess, if she did not again thank him in words, thanked
conviction—aiming at the punishment of vice and folly, and patronizing

Schoss, and his old nurse, and asked them to kiss for him “dear
then detached ideas and impressions from the world of reality shot

a whole volume of laws for Russia. Nowadays they are always writing!”





Dólokhov’s proposal and Iogel’s ball, seemed to have grown thicker

fat, is killed for meat.
eyes full of tears and of thoughts, gazing shiningly and imploringly at
Napoleon’s army had only awaited to begin its flight.

happiness possible, and that is just what you want to deprive him of.
the exhausted, wavering men felt comforted and inspirited.
that he would have to answer it justly, and justice clashed not only
Pierre could not go on. He gulped and turned away.
and constraint was evident, as if they were ashamed of not having loved
much prettier. Pierre was received as if he were a corpse or a leper.
Princess Mary feel shy but happy by this demonstration of her feelings.
Lopukhín and the old general occasionally took part in the
The commencement of that movement was the movement from west to east.
after his death.
escape, and Bagratión’s four thousand men merrily lighted campfires,

man, but those with whom he happened to be. He loved his dog, his
start my apprenticeship as old maid.”
out again more evenly, and the clerk led Pétya—pale and breathless—to

get it for me and put it under for a moment,” he pleaded in a piteous
the time.”
he was in doubt or inwardly at variance, he referred to the views he had
tired and panting and evidently thought of declining, but immediately

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
bridge he saw two unlimbered guns, the infantry crossing the bridge,
“Nesvítski, Nesvítski! you numskull!” came a hoarse voice from
“Have you heard the password?” asked one Guards’ officer of
“I saw him myself,” replied the man with a self-confident smile of
Andrew’s story the condition Russia was in. “But give me time, give me
rapturous exclamations were heard from all sides.
naked body and shuddered, not from cold but from a sense of disgust
“Well, how are you going to get out of that?” he remarked.

and awaited the inevitable explosion. Until the doctor’s arrival the
those of the Russian people whose representative he considered himself
of itself when ripe, but if picked unripe the apple is spoiled, the tree
maid, was advancing to the spot where the general stood, but the French
“He is my refuge! His will be done!” he exclaimed.
and thereby corrects the inevitable error which the human mind cannot
from the others. All was blended into one brilliant procession.
also quickened their pace—rode down a hill, and passing through an empty
impossible to make the story of the retreat fit their theory. But
that the pupils’ parents wept at having to let him take their children
happen and my heart tells me it will.”



during his courtship of Hélène.
“And did you really see and speak to Napoleon, as we have been told?”
insulted. Barclay de Tolly tried to command the army in the best
increased by the fact that the Russian commanders—not having fully
talk, but I don’t want to,” he seemed to say. Besides this, in his
The word of command rang out, and again the regiment quivered, as with a
than I expected. Evidently it had to be....”
and suddenly began to cry.
qualifications for it—the kind of good-natured, fussy shallowness
Natásha had grown thin and pale and physically so weak that they all
cooked before we reach our quarters.”
gilt-edged... it must be exactly like the sample. Varnish, sealing wax,
allow anyone to put a spoke in his wheel,” observed Anna Pávlovna.
importance of the rite now being performed and even approved of it. He
no getting them together. The army should push on before the rest bolt,
readily let him go and gave him a mission to Barclay de Tolly.
indifferent hands of the Minister of War and the polite adjutant. The
for he could not help being what he was—that (though he tried to
a tender, sly smile. His glance met Malásha’s, and the expression of his
evidently only to justify himself before the stranger. “Sister must have
all....”
Mary. Neither he nor she said a word about what “Natásha nursing him”
During that twenty-year period an immense number of fields were left

Anna Pávlovna’s drawing room was gradually filling. The highest
that he can order me about. I will certainly go to the French camp with

and without awaiting a reply, Prince Andrew rose and left the table.
“My dear, you order what is right.... You know I don’t understand about

aside, drawing her hand downward. “I have heard of certain projects

in no way binding) might give time for part of the transport to pass,
Count Wittgenstein had defeated the French, but that as many of the
wife, and that it could not be otherwise.

Princess Bolkónskaya, together with his silence and coldness of late,
sent for a senior officer. Getting out of his calèche, he waited with
civilians drew near merely to see him. A rumble of Russian and French
whom they met on the way. He felt it in the merry sounds of regimental

their hair dressed à la grecque.
Pultúsk to Petersburg returns bringing our appointment as commander in
admiration for his wife.
Rasgulyáy—the coachman Ipátka knows—and look up the gypsy


for a seat.

grew still kinder. The younger sisters also became affectionate to him,
“Well, and are you still true to Borís?” he continued.
In an hour, all the costumes were crumpled and disordered. The corked

His Majesty the Emperor derogates from the principle of our alliance...
left wing, Napoleon said it should not be done, without explaining
All night long troops were moving past the inn. Next morning Alpátych

could be faintly heard. The men were forbidden to talk out loud, to
ninety thousand strong, was to threaten Prussia so as to bring her out

was spitting blood. A bullet had evidently hit him in the throat or
almost hot, no wind could be felt. The birches with their sticky green

living in close touch with these people it was apparent that these
that Daniel and I are often quite astounded,” said Simon, well knowing

and her brother. For herself she did not care where she remained or what

Countess Mary listened to her husband and understood all that he told
splashing into puddles as they crossed a road. The misty sky still
Mary.


senator, and in general with whatever speech he had last heard.
mori,” said these glances.
but I am still so weak that I love my life, the meaning of which is only
co-operate with him for the public welfare! Lay your respect and

troops were no longer moving, but stood with the butts of their muskets
remembering Suvórov, said that what one had to do was not to reason,

The battalion commander perceived the jovial irony and laughed.
him for the love of heaven to drive carefully down the hill. He knew
lines of communication. The battle was fought and thousands were killed
Natásha looked intently at him and went on:

“Awfully angry!” he said, smiling and getting up. And smoothing his hair
behind the cavalry. He was armed with a musketoon (which he carried
detailed account of his adventures.
“One can see them with the naked eye... Why, there!”
Theodore had gone.
said Prince Andrew, and he snorted several times.
smooth as a sign that the conversation was at an end.
“Today when I remembered that all these delightful associations
himself?
society. He believed this so firmly that others, looking at him, were
retreating against their will. A few minutes after the Emperor had

“Dead, I fancy. Eh, Makéev?” queried the doctor, in a tone of
you’ll be appointed adjutant somewhere and can snap your fingers when

his eyes at the sight.
sky. A red glow as of a conflagration spread above the horizon from the
went on, addressing his son and patting Pierre on the shoulder. “A
distance he heard as he rode the merry sounds of a soldier’s dance song
fire!”
Although Prince Vasíli listened reluctantly and not very politely
round her head.
French colonel, whispered respectfully: “The King of Naples!” It was,

enchanting?... It’s our turn to begin.”
Whether it was the wine he had drunk, or an impulse of frankness, or the
checked any attempt to ridicule him to his face.
the main army and that Kutúzov has been appointed commander in chief. He
But all the same that night Natásha, now agitated and now frightened,
and galloped off. But no sooner had he left Bagratión than his courage
different from that of its elders which is often insincere, Nicholas
expression on the faces of the crowd of soldiers and militiamen who were
reckoning the Guards (who did nothing during the whole war but pillage)

the looking glass.

carrying a large book of sheets of drawing paper; I said, “I drew
I...? I am something altogether different and higher.’”
overcoats, the same sounds of firing which, though distant now, still
his head, and with inimical politeness lurking in the corners of his
I am as devoted to him as before: I know him thoroughly and very highly
possible. And I,” continued Pierre, “shot Dólokhov because I
on Petersburg?... In any of these eventualities the flank march that

When Borís appeared at his door Pierre was pacing up and down his room,
Mary spent most of the day in the nursery, taking a mother’s place to
Natásha did not care for society in general, but prized the more the


did his utmost to gain his new master’s favor.

and began to speak in a voice in which for the first time new deep
spite of the fact that to some highly placed Russians it seemed rather
and moved to the right; from behind it, dispersing the laggards, came
“Would you like a little mash?” the first soldier asked, and handed
The little princess talked incessantly, her short, downy upper lip
“He! dishonorable? If you only knew!” exclaimed Natásha.

It was a long time before she could sleep. She kept thinking that no one


glance at Ilyín, who was pressing close to him. This officer, a lad

of Alexander and Bonaparte. It struck him as a surprise that Alexander
They were silent for a few seconds. Then suddenly turning to one
two languages could be heard. They were looking at the glow seen in the
would be no contradicting, and her plans would be spoiled; and so,
Tsarévich Constantine Pávlovich; Count Rumyántsev, the Chancellor;
At that moment Count Rostopchín with his protruding chin and alert eyes,
the number of people taking part in it the more rapidly was the wealth

screams kept repeating:
face, and Prince Andrew saw that Hippolyte, of whom—he had to
sleepless nights or the hardest tasks had he shown the least fatigue,

the castle. In spite of the severe frost some hundred generals and staff
possible if there was danger.
abodes! You will soon find means of satisfying your needs. Craftsmen
definite meaning, and which can therefore be readily introduced into any
might at any moment indulge in some freak, as he seemed much upset by

confess and ask for money he had no right to after giving his word of
After hearing the matter, Kutúzov smacked his lips together and shook
eyes grew dim. By the expression of her father’s face, not sad, not
cover that it was Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis.

old princess, kissing her soundly. “If I hadn’t this headache I’d
he says: ‘I’m a general’s son myself, I won’t go!’ he says.”
Prince Hippolyte himself glanced around with amused surprise. He knew no
though the big hospitals and the houses in Krems converted into military
Rostóv riding in front gave the order “Forward!” and the hussars, with
was vexed with himself for having stayed.
ever was Borís resolved to serve in future not according to the written
the same breeding and traditions, Bolkónski would soon have discovered
“In the seventh place, try, by the frequent thought of death,” the
from the theater, had had supper and were grouped round the clavichord.
be done, just as a quarter of an hour before it had not seemed strange
of Moscow and had always been protected from the consequences by “my
in compliance with any particular paper edition.
sum of individual wills is never expressed by the activity of a single
try to do all I can for your happiness.”
next day and night. She did not sleep and did not leave her mother. Her
himself the following of the state of affairs.
“So there’s nothing?”
reached. Wheels creak on their axles as the cogs engage one another and
CHAPTER XIII
asked.
and looking carelessly about him.
abstain from attributing to the activity of the mass aims that existed
spoke (he could tell a story very well), Natásha listened to him
“How did that fellow get here?” asked Pierre.
weapon) and looked now at the superior officers and now back at the men
with lighted tapers in their hands, slowly and solemnly conducting the
instead of that he only excited himself more and more.

and, taking Natásha’s hand, kissed it.

NAPOLEON
“She let the hawk fly upward from her wide right sleeve,” went the
out by the other gates. In spite of Rostopchín’s broadsheets, or because
and therefore in the way that always produces the most powerful results.
sometimes devised other words they might have spoken.
appear to notice the constraint the newcomer produced and, with the same
Tsar about it too. Anyone who stays is a traitor to the Tsar. Do you

service,” said the prince disdainfully. “Why his son is coming I
his power was limited. The armies were divided, there was no unity of
The following day he saw Princess Mary off on her journey to Yaroslávl,
wholly occupied his mind.
being occupied with serious matters. In winter, except for business
itself, a petty German town, Rostóv saw the Emperor again. In the
find their wars and battles carried out in accordance with previously
Métivier out by the scruff of his neck because he is a Frenchman and
The combatants advanced along the trodden tracks, nearer and nearer to
be heads of the departments when everybody has to pass examinations?”

He spoke so rapidly that he did not finish half his words, but his son

“Marry me, and I will be your slave!”
“Oh, but you were there?” said Prince Bagratión, addressing Prince
Nicholas Rostóv experienced this blissful condition to the full when,
folly, and cruelty. He thought of his wife. “They are all alike!” he
which results from the conception of freedom? That is a question for
“Andrew! One thing I beg, I entreat of you!” she said, touching his
for a year; but Natásha attacked her brother with exasperation, proving
“Yes, yes, of course,” said Pierre, “isn’t that what I’m
that the man who advocates the conclusion of a peace, and that the
Andrew went to one and took out a small casket, from which he drew a
whole world—seemed to him centered in his love and the possibility of
a real one, but that they would talk of that later. Princess Mary was
of Natásha who had never experienced anything of this sort, had never
on duty every day, or may place me under arrest, but no one can make
uneasy curiosity men feel when they see an alien form of life that has
unconsciously bent on avoiding the contemplation of the horrors of their
“They probably recognized that I am French, by my name,” replied



Alexander’s Guards,” said the first one, indicating a Russian
so sensibly employed the best and simplest means to attain his end was
please excuse me,” he went on apologetically.
And Dólokhov swore at him in coarse soldier’s Russian and shouldering
As soon as historians of different nationalities and tendencies begin
went, angry and scowling and without answering questions as to where he
the words she always used when Pierre or her son returned after an
died in this place.... When a new one comes he is done for in a week,”
the prince sternly; “I’m afraid you write much nonsense. I’ll read

included scarcely a hundred and forty thousand who spoke French. The

the whole place and the warm air heated by the crowd, Natásha little
Pyramids,” of the sacrifices he offered for the fatherland, or of
have got some notion or other in your head. You hide everything from
“How handsome the old man still was only a year ago!” remarked the

“And so, brother,” he continued, with a smile on his pale emaciated face
enemy in full strength at Borodinó—defeated at Krásnoe and the Berëzina
“What is it you wish, Colonel? I am at your service.”
pale on seeing her father-in-law.
family. That same day, Rostóv, profiting by the darkness to avoid being
of the room.
paraissent être des moyens de soutenir ce sentiment.” *

and dropped it again behind her. Prince Andrew recognized her without
again assumed its anxious expression.
ally. We shall therefore confidently await the moment when the Imperial
CHAPTER XIV
see whether they were getting up.
crept unobserved into his heart and once more bound him to life. And

betrothed comes here now—there will be no avoiding a quarrel; but
cunning way, are ready to render any sort of service to their master,
    De boire, de battre,
again. “Oh, what a terrible thing is fear, and how shamefully I yielded
“They can’t be far off, probably just beyond the stream,” he said
footsteps beyond the door, both halves of it were opened rapidly; all

rising to his eyes. The little fellow, giving Pierre no time to betray
badly—all this debauchery, dissipation, and the rest of it!”
After reading the letter Natásha sat down at the writing table
for whom he longed appear before him and, having pressed her hand to his
wall. The red-faced man was still twitching, but they did not carry him
going with us.”
vanished into the darkness.

those who were disputing honestly.
very numbers and their crowded and swift movement deprived them of that

nephew. To her consternation she detected in herself in relation to
might be killed like the three sons of one of her acquaintances, struck
expecting him.”
“Board them!” yelled the tipsy man, trying to press the trigger. Hearing
    BOOK FIFTEEN: 1812 - 13
Emperor’s arrival, lay several killed and wounded soldiers whom there
from the Emperor Alexander and am very glad to see you.” He glanced with
“They have gone away, sir. Went away yesterday at vespertime,” said
The officer, without answering him, strode across to the opposite side.


him several questions about his journey and seemed greatly interested in

rubles’ worth of things in the house. I don’t consent, my dear, I don’t!
us like this, I seem lost and can’t do anything. Now do I love my
and love. And if anyone came into his room at such moments he was

and interests before him! “Yes, they have taken a wise decision,” he
alcohol, and sounds of voices and shouting in the distance.
The man who had wakened yawned and stretched himself.

him with difficulty.
her. Pétya ran in at the same time.

it, she was herself in such high spirits at that moment, so far from
hands. It is essential for him to combine his movements with those of
expression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with

You’ve disgraced yourself like the lowest of hussies. I’d treat you

unnatural and dreadful in this impending marriage of Natásha and Prince
legs, looked directly at Prince Vasíli with no sign of emotion in her
part in the popular defense of Moscow which he knew was projected. And



several dead men. One ball after another passed over as he approached


as with his feet.
another.


pilgrims, Princess Mary prepared a pilgrim’s complete costume for

and the more correctly we perceive the physiological, psychological,
can, and the suggestion of merriment in that floundering mass rendered

“How do you do, my dear? I wish you many happy returns of your name
it was useless to talk to the old man; that he would never grasp the

At dinner, at which champagne was drunk to the health of the new
and looks of those who had seen them together. He recalled Anna
their shoulders but not venturing to utter the implied word—le
And Bilíbin repeated the actual words of the diplomatic dispatch, which
Túshin smiling shyly in his uncomfortable position, evidently wishing
less sincerely than the twenty-year-old Rostóv.
adjutant on Kutúzov’s staff, but he does everything alone. The next
But the guns remained loaded, the loopholes in blockhouses and
“Scoundrel, what are you doing?” shouted the innkeeper, rushing to the
he lacked that strength of will which he had known in himself and really
such as Princess Mary had not seen on her face for a long time, “he has
that the Rostóvs involuntarily came to think it would be a good thing,
Princess Mary heard his words but they had no meaning for her, except as
his fiancée’s, would not stand a year’s test, or that he (the old
into the heart of Russia late in the season without any preparation for

“What is wrong? What is it, Princess?”

“Well, little countess? What a sauté of game au madère we are to


I have received what was due from the Ryazán estate and will keep it;
countermarches, things of which I understand nothing; and the day
counter movement reaches the starting point of the first movement in the

flourishing his arm, called him to enter.
“And there’s nothing for you to say. I shall speak to him myself,”

awaiting him. Kutúzov even imagined that Napoleon’s army might turn back
the sacrifice of their lives how devoted they are....”
she was not even grateful to him for it; nothing good on Pierre’s part
very muscular men, and on the night of the battle, having arrived

way on the bench where she had seated herself on arriving. She was
Moscow, and news of the surrender of Moscow to the French spread through
that his Serene Highness did not wish his face to be seen.




conversation began Prince Andrew was struck by the fact that the Emperor
of exasperation. “Don’t you hear it’s His Majesty the Emperor’s
Prince Kutúzov’s adjutant has brought me a letter in which he demands
man of clerical appearance with a tuft of gray hair at the back of
rapidly adding up the total of Rostóv’s debt, breaking the chalk as
breaking the silence and pointing to Natásha. “She looks after me all
customary remark: “It’s not the gift that’s precious, my dear, but that
Specialist historians describing the campaign of 1813 or the restoration
In the damp chill air and crowded closeness of the swaying carriage, she
man, like an officer—comes in and sits down to table with her.”
memory, his extensive reading (he had read everything, knew everything,
imagination Andrew’s face as she remembered it in childhood, a gentle,
Through that door was heard a noise of things being moved about, and
asleep at a council, and has the very worst morals! A good reputation
“I will do it all, Father,” he said.
Ivánovna, joyously playing with the word, called it, seemed to Natásha
inflicted on the Duke of Oldenburg, the nonobservance of the Continental
‘we tie our faces up with kerchiefs and turn our heads away as we drag
Killed them, yes!” said he, frowning angrily and turning away from
people to leave Moscow was false; on the contrary he was glad that
Olmütz and that he wanted to see him as he had a letter and money for
place,” thought Pierre. “It’s even certain that I should have done
The serfs all dispersed. “Uncle” lifted Natásha off her horse and
bottles of wine with him and, despite the jolting ruts across the



“That is doubtful,” said Prince Andrew. “Monsieur le Vicomte quite
Hebrew, in which the first nine letters denote units and the others
screamed with delight and tears fell from her eyes. But this only
it meant. The same question was expressed in all the looks that met his.

invasion of the Russian provinces, and no one thought the war would
Hélène’s face became terrible, she shrieked and sprang aside. His


from various people and retelling the town gossip.
“Well,” he said, “Khvóstikov must have two thousand.”
“I am very glad to meet you here, Count,” he said aloud, regardless
    CHAPTER V
thou hast lost.”

Dólokhov with a cold smile and a gleam in his handsome insolent eyes
“Let me introduce my brother to you,” said Hélène, her eyes
oneself to regard the arrangements without religious awe of his genius,

came a letter from Kutúzov informing the prince of the fate that had
against the fence to save himself from falling.
struggle, but with naïve and lighthearted gaiety.
“Nonsense, nonsense!” cried the old man, shaking his pigtail to

freshly formed to defeat him wherever he may appear. May the ruin he

“Folly... folly! Death... lies...” he repeated, puckering his face.
“She is very ill,” said Pierre.
he shrugged his shoulders and raised his hand to the kerchief, as if
Pétya blushed.
CHAPTER XIII
for everything. Of late he had exhibited a new trait that tormented
Weyrother.
“Calm yourself, my dear. I will go to my father,” she said, and went
words, he added, “Don’t be hurt, my dear fellow; you know I speak
He checked himself, fearing to seem naïve, yet he felt an irresistible
Russia the less did he realize their significance. In Petersburg and
“But you haven’t refused Bolkónski?” said she.
confidence at his feet and do not delay to unite with us!
event seems to have taken place. Napoleon III issues a decree and the

“How glad I am you’ve come! I am so happy today,” she said, with the old

straight on his head. He took off his wet felt cloak in a corner of
today or tomorrow—at any rate, in an instant as compared with
Some of the soldiers were frightened and ran away, others went on
repeated, articulating each syllable distinctly, and, not replying to

leaning with his arms on the back of the sofa, sat in his former
Torzhók embroidery came into the room offering their services.
the understanding of the force which produces events, and furnish no
“When the snow melts they’ll sink in the Polish swamps. Only they

As soon as Nicholas entered in his hussar uniform, diffusing around him
esaul one saw that he was as comfortable and as much at ease as always
now centered round the Emperor. So we will go to Dolgorúkov; I have to
voice from heaven. How gladly would he have died at once for his Tsar!
help and strengthen me that I may walk in Thy ways! Read the Scriptures,
     * “My dear, my tender, my poor mother.”
“But what nonsense I have been saying to the governor’s wife!” thought
Natásha stopped. It was impossible to talk. It was plain that he was
government, thousands of enemy stragglers, marauders, and foragers had
They all seemed dissatisfied and uneasy. Pierre went up to a group of
had become habitual to him in speaking of the present war.
more expedient than by the destruction of wealth and of human lives.
as the little princess used to do. He alone did not obey the law of
soldiers of his army whether they had taken part in the battle or not,

you?”
    CHAPTER XII

it is a bit of Mack. We are Macked),” he concluded, feeling that he
her. She knew that when he thought aloud in this way he would sometimes
in her room, making her eat and drink, and talking to her incessantly
And he began clearly and concisely to explain his reasons for
conversation.


Vasíli, “but it is difficult for me to ask the Emperor. I should
from his commanders. During his absence he had been promoted captain,
the life of nations during which various powers arise simultaneously and
entertaining or amusing in what was going on. His face was sad and
obtain that impossible, visionary, sinful happiness. Prince Andrew had
one noticed how fast the troyka was flying. Nicholas looked back. With

troops from west to east. He went in a traveling coach with six horses,
his success. In the course of conversation he mentioned Moscow and
wishing to show him that she did not even dare expect to interest him,

that he can act as he pleases. Every man, savage or sage, however
And with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him, he raised the
in front were pushing back those who had pressed too close to the
to the door of the conservatory where he slept that night had listened

heard bickering with one another.
under fire for the first time.
as in a game of blindman’s buff the French ran into our vanguard. Seeing
to stimulate his emotions he looked around. “God, death, love, the
sighing...” thought Princess Mary.




bed, and long after her candle was out lay open-eyed and motionless,

as if she had to give some final necessary instructions.
shako on the back of his head. He came up to the porch gloomily, hanging
familiar voice. “One is afraid of the unknown, that’s what it is.

to ordinary conditions of life and sleep quietly in a room in his own
matted on the forehead, but his face, though puffy and yellow, expressed
tune of which she had all the way been trying to get and had at last
noticing that Terénty wanted a chat, generally kept him there.
“Well, Prince?” asked Kozlóvski.
Natásha. In the whole narrative she saw only Pierre and his goodness.
that peculiar expression of polite weariness which plainly says, “If

could all this have happened?” thought she. “If, after that, I could
on the lazy, the depraved, and the weak, and tried to get them expelled
Napoleon noticed at once what they were about and guessed that they were
dumfound people and impel them to insane self-oblivion. He called for
continually deplored the ignorance and poverty of Russia and its
“Only not for this...” Pierre suddenly exclaimed with a laugh, and

where scarcely a day passes without conflagrations when the house owners
While waiting for the young man to take his place on the step Rostopchín
past the company, and overtook the carriage, still keeping time to the
pausing, went into the study, giving instructions to his adjutant as he
sideways down the steps to the level of the street, took in his hand the
Alpátych, understanding the question to refer to their departure for
given), which under his leadership will be directed against the redoubt

“when the steward, a man I know, ran out and asked me whether I wouldn’t
as Berg said, “very agreeable and well en évidence.”
As I do not intend to be at your house again for reasons you know
with his foot.
favorite, “how is it you have so little tact? Don’t you see you are
her jaws and she was fastened with a leash, as if bridled, her legs were
five times. He entered the room softly. The little princess, plump and

And so the anecdote ended. Though it was unintelligible why he had told
opened eyes. “What has happened to her? How she is singing today!”
into the vehicles.
from Moscow back to the Niemen were like those in a game of Russian
treetops and bluish gorges. The turrets of a convent stood out beyond a
her husband, took a very prominent place. She was visited by the members
this Melyukóvka? Heaven only knows where we are going, and heaven knows
drew her chair nearer to that of the countess.
On reaching Moscow after her meeting with Rostóv, Princess Mary had
CHAPTER II
End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of War and Peace, by Leo Tolstoy
happened during those last days and during the first days of their
shan’t get away before evening. Look, look there.... Why, that must be
Moscow; and though there was nothing for him to do at Bald Hills, Prince

and 1809, gaining strength and growing. In 1811 the group of people that

“You don’t understand?” shouted the prince, “but I do! French
them.
sacrament at the shrine of the saint. And now I’m from Kolyázin,
am staying in for your sake,” and so on. And though Prince Vasíli,
indefiniteness), but certain persons whose opinions he wished to know in
“Prince,” said Berg, recognizing Prince Andrew, “I only spoke because
“You are a colonel?” shouted the chief of staff with a German accent,
patted his favorite, Rostóv, on the shoulder.
had. It was full of officers.
Prince Andrew interrupted him and cried sharply: “Yes, ask her hand

“Any news from Mack?”

and could not imagine.
began to spread in Moscow; people spoke of an appeal by the Emperor to
Formerly I very much wanted Nicholas to marry her, but I always had
without attacking. It was necessary to let the French reach Shámshevo
chair (which seemed to place itself under him), and sat down on it
Otrádnoe and showed him his last letter.
and kissing her, and then he left the room with rapid steps.
his early liberalism, the advisers who surrounded him, and by
this instant!” thought Rostóv.
the cold wind, swarmed in these earthworks like a host of white ants;
loftiness of soul. She has refused to evacuate Malta. She wanted to

The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude.
The card tables were drawn out, sets made up for boston, and the
Vasílchikov and Plátov had already seen the count and explained to him
something very important—more important than anything he had ever done
“But military men have told me that it is impossible to fight in the
body of a coach standing before the porch, the small glow of another
up her downy little lip. “All the pretty women in society will be
some way) telling him about Denísov’s affair, asking him whether,




for us. The field marshal looks on and waits for letters addressed
fight the Austrians?
Notwithstanding the tone of wearied assurance with which these words
depth of my soul I agreed with him. Talking of my family affairs he said

so...”

If the purpose of food is nourishment and the purpose of marriage is the
skeleton, with a stern sallow face and eyes intently fixed on Rostóv.
to accept their services. He took the glove in silence from the
arms, another group of horsemen galloped up to the opposite flank, and
influence of the dark, graceful girl who loved another.
him do what he pleases,’ she used to say of me. One day I asked her if
friend.
face was animated, which, however, did not conceal its sunken and faded
of its rightful king,” she concluded, trying to be amiable to the
two, three... One... “Oh mio crudele affetto.”... One, two, three...
said that the Russians need only make one more slight effort and the
“They are men too,” said one of them as he wrapped himself up in his
forever remained a cruel memory to them both. He had not time to say it,
Alexéevich’s advice Pierre had entered the service of the state and
fearing he might take her words as meant to move him to pity, looked at
Morel brought candles and a bottle of wine. The captain looked at Pierre
were tuned to a high pitch and this was too simple and needlessly
“That’s a fine death!” said Napoleon as he gazed at Bolkónski.
what the way was prepared for his activity. If we have a large range
Esaul Lováyski the Third was a tall man as straight as an arrow,
nothing... nobody. Did he know that? No, he did not and never will know
authorities to secure advantageous means of communication for herself


crossed herself, bowed low, and when she did not understand, in horror

porch to meet their master. A score of women serfs, old and young, as

Prince Andrew laughed disagreeably, again reminding one of his father.
felt ashamed of his speech with its constitutional tendency and sought

Nicholas did not go to Moscow, and the countess did not renew the
beloved nobility and my good peasants and so use the last resources of
was galloping toward the knoll on a lathering horse. It was Belliard.
others, chiefly Germans.
    * Frühstück: breakfast.

saying that he dare not even mention the matter to the count. Pity these
CHAPTER VII
“You won’t be able to find either your baggage or anything else now,
strides trying to keep to the footprints left on the meadow by the
were mentioned of how the private physician of the Queen of Spain had
“Are you the Elder? Bind him, Lavrúshka!” shouted Rostóv, as if that
nodded to them. (He liked to see new faces.)


Hippolyte spluttered again, and amid his laughter said, “And you were

and his court to leave the army; that the mere presence of the Emperor
    CHAPTER XX
diamonds and pearls on their bare necks and arms.
from under our noses,” thought Denísov, continually peering forward,
Guards in Moscow, is it possible that the enemy’s forces confronting you
army because he wished to, or because he was very stupid, would be as
in her male attire she seemed quite a different person. Louisa Ivánovna
it. Telyánin took the purse and began carelessly slipping it into the

Pierre walked along, looking from side to side, counting his steps in
reading or writing in his study. Pierre had but to show a partiality for
tears.

“A perfect picture! How he chased a fox out of the rank grass by the
indispensable because they satisfied a mental need of the invalid and
That winter the Karágins’ house was the most agreeable and hospitable
history: to say that the field of battle at Borodinó remained in the
Following this letter one of the Masonic Brothers whom Pierre respected
a rupture gazed at her son with terror, but in the obstinacy and
de Bal-machève.” But royauté oblige! * and he felt it incumbent on
there.”
with all Petersburg, and his court service with its dull formalities.
On her way to supper Natásha passed him.
turn...”



and conflict with which he had trodden the Enns bridge, but with the
his lessons, teaching him Russian and music herself, and talking to

surprised how simple and easy had been what used to appear so



around he heard his comrades sobbing with joy.
“Does it ever happen to you,” said Natásha to her brother, when
with mild irony old times in Moscow and Moscow acquaintances. It was
go of its nuts. Ten minutes after each regiment had entered a Moscow

having lost a single man. The second squadron that had been in the front

“Oh, Natásha!” said Sónya, looking ecstatically and earnestly at

Natásha only desisted when she had been told that there would be
answer to the count’s inquiries she replied that things were all
to. Weyrother had been twice that evening to the enemy’s picket
in four different provinces. He had arranged this for himself so as to
orders which showed that the Russian troops, who had hitherto been
minutes later the eldest sister came out with a pale hard face, again
“I only wonder that the fate of Russia could have been entrusted to such


harder his position became and the more terrible the future, the more
remained intact and that during Napoleon’s occupation the inhabitants
tail and mane and a bleeding mouth, rode a young officer in a blue

gaze from Rostopchín’s face muttered softly:

man beside you?”

who’s a better man than you in every way...”
but the shouting which accompanied him everywhere disturbed him and
over my business and I’ll go away.”
campaigns he had been in, told as by an old soldier. He did not himself
was a combined service of prayer on the occasion of the Emperor’s

“Besides that, Peter Nikoláevich, by exchanging into the Guards
plan long ago and now expounded it not so much to answer the questions

infantry in different uniforms; now was heard the rhythmic beat of
“I called once or twice at your house,” said Rostóv, reddening.
against the power once appointed, should be absolutely regarded as an
nothing extraordinary in the capture of Murat. Still, it is better to
now the same happy smile as then when he had looked into her eyes. “I
Darling, sweetheart, come here! There, you see? I feel like sitting down
mere amusement.”
children’s voices and laughter from the next room. Evidently some jolly
marched, followed only by their escort and the vehicles and wagons
disgrace the whole regiment? Disgrace the whole regiment because of one
passed in step before the Emperors and their suites at a bold, brisk
an immeasurable height. When the old man began to speak too loud,

    CHAPTER V
conversation, and though Anna Pávlovna felt sure he would say something
Louis XVI. But why did it not react on Louis XIV or on Louis XV—why
the countess, trying to conceal the action from herself and from him,
the Emperor’s neglect of him by His Majesty’s displeasure at
He pulled himself together, looked round, screwing up his eyes, glanced
this table with the thought of winning a hundred rubles to buy that


Ermólov, Milorádovich, Plátov, and others in proximity to the French
trying to him, and the freedom and independence he had once prized
without an inner struggle; “at such a moment as this one must think
degree embarrassing for the Russians, as the most adroit diplomatists of
the Smolénsk) road acted simultaneously on him also.
Kutúzov looked at him with eyes wide open with dismay and then took off
which had grown much older.
those words, that is to say, so utterly impossible that if any senseless
intellectual pride,” said the princess, following the train of her own
“I shan’t be violent, don’t be afraid!” said Pierre in answer to a

anything in this crazy world.”
the wrong place, and for a long time two menservants stood one on
the same chair à canon, the sight of which had even then filled him with
The peasant is irrefutable. He has devised a complete explanation. To
the porch and the cook came running into the vestibule.

Pierre noticed that after every ball that hit the redoubt, and after
But Dólokhov did not go away; he untied the handkerchief around his



Pierre looked over the wall of the trench and was particularly struck
Princess Mary was left alone. She did not comply with Lise’s request,

off his courage, had ridden on to the planks of the bridge:
sat playing patience with the old gentlewoman who lived in their house.
for eighty thousand rubles. Berg smiled meekly, kissed the count on the
going there or not going there; here there were not twenty-four hours
to criticize them, but remembered my rules and my benefactor’s
the Emperor was. One could see that he wished to pass through the rooms
Cossacks.”
“Please come and visit us... you know my brave boy... been together
confused when Denísov asked him whether he could stay. Before they had
encounter one another at the clean, smart hussars who moved past them in
The horses stepped over the field as over a thick carpet, now and then
“If a battle takes place within the next three days the French will
as my sister Natásha was engaged to her brother it was of course out of
could not fathom whether it was curiosity, devotion, gratitude, or
“Oh, the devil!” exclaimed Denísov angrily, and showing his teeth he
however they might change the setting and adornment of that face, it
statement that the greater or lesser success of one army against another
cannot attain the knowledge of which you speak.”
He could not live, because all man’s efforts, all his impulses to life,

do not help matters, but hinder. They are only concerned with their own
sister’s, but while in her case everything was lit up by a joyous,
These justifications release those who produce the events from moral
hostile, some dreadful, terrifying, and repellent mystery!” And hiding
occupied by Borís and Zhilínski.
delight us continually by falling from the sky.
angered the countess when it was not properly cleaned, turned as loosely
unconsciously put out her tongue as if chiding herself. Seeing that

were in animated talk over their tea about the events of the day and the
he is better acquainted than anyone else, does not listen to others but
son, Ilyá? Only fancy, I didn’t know you at first. Do you remember
historical accounts. On the contrary it is a very mild expression of

of them removed the balloon that was being constructed by Leppich; now
Guards. Prince Andrew came up to him and took his hand.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access
casement. The cold wind flapped the ends of her kerchief and her loose
jolted over the stony road. Some of them were talking (he heard Russian
were sitting and one was lying. One of those sitting up in the cart had
riding away. “If you are determined to rob, I’ll...”
be either Mary Nikoláevna’s or the Ivánovs’!”
themselves. The deeper we delve in search of these causes the more of

    CHAPTER XX
not giving Dunyásha time to finish what she was saying, and trying to

table on a corner of which he smilingly and absent-mindedly fixed his


who had now become a wealthy heiress through the death of the last of
One man ought to be in command, and not two. Your Minister may perhaps
“You remember?” Sónya went on. “I saw it then and told everybody, you
him; not think of him but forget him, quite forget him for the present.

Paulucci and Michaud both attacked Wolzogen simultaneously in French.
that these will be safeguarded, since such is the will of the greatest
unconsciousness and freedom of his movements.
eyes with her hand.
They said: “Nothing but sorrow, shame, and ruin will come of all this!
and which he called his “will.”)
(nicknamed in society, “the King of Prussia”) ever since the Emperor
had managed affairs badly in Moscow, he dispatched Yákovlev to
of being afraid roused him again. “I cannot be afraid,” thought he,
in sections—against Petersburg, or against him, or to outflank him.
else.
“Dere has neffer been a gase,” a German doctor was saying to an
when he first loved her. He thought of her pregnancy and felt sorry for
stripes on their bodies heal, and they are happy as before. But it is
way and manner of farming which produced good results.
He could see puffs of musketry smoke that seemed to chase one another
Prince Andrew shared their wish for the success of their enterprise. He

the army,” and which constitutes the sinew of war, Kutúzov’s words, his
cloak and felt boots, he went to the little princess’ apartment.
clucked his tongue and let his horses go.
Hills might be dangerous, he respectfully advised her to send a letter
“Without doubt, sire,” replied Rapp.
eyes that seemed to say: “Ah, there he is! Let’s see what will come of
and that they were being taken to the proper place. Pierre felt himself
the Lord and we are Thy people. Show Thy mercy upon us this day, O Lord,
up out of the mist.
with cords.
stinging rejoinders he made to his enemies. His hospital companions,
“Well, then, you know more than anyone else, be it who it may,” said
what Magnítski was going to say. When Prince Andrew entered the room

When they all drove back from Pelagéya Danílovna’s, Natásha, who
on her friend.
mysteries, had been raised to a higher grade, and was bringing back with
“The Karágins, Julie—and Borís with them. One can see at once that

Hendríkhovna to preside, they all crowded round her. One offered her a
commanded by Bennigsen and directed by Toll, had started in due order
in the sound of his voice, in the stirring and deafening noise of the
remain stationary in face of an enemy eight times as strong as itself.
sorrowful, and all-forgiving expression on her face, stood by the door
is it that we in our irrecoverable youth did not know it? Yet it is so

arrange that?” said Hélène.
other fare, was splendid, yet he could not feel quite at ease till the
loved for the first and only time in her life and felt that she was
bugler and two Cossacks, Balashëv reached the French outposts at the
horror, as by a presentiment.
    CHAPTER XVII
the lodge and was about to dash into that part of it which was still
“I say, shall we soon be clear? They say the cavalry are blocking the

of circumstances. But at the same time just this aim demands the
“brother-instructor” as he called the Grand Master.


he has no one. He is constantly alone with his thoughts.”
whole.’ So he begged: ‘Take me to her, take me to her.’ It’s the
CHAPTER XVIII


him, listening silently and with a stern frown to what Fabvier told him
retire—an irresistible curiosity kept him there.

one another time to ask questions and give replies concerning a thousand
gap left by the collar, through which Matrëna’s brilliant smile was
“Why ride into the middle of the battalion?” one of them shouted at him.
retreating troops were filling it. Why should that cause the masses to
that he read this diary about his children for the first time.
“No... why not, my dear, why shouldn’t I? I like him. He is kind,

steadily and ceaselessly on all sides. With the exception of the aunt,
make me any happier or better?”


‘We don’t love people so much for the good they have done us, as
“The soldiers say it feels easier without boots,” said Captain
glanced indifferently at the portrait and gave her attention chiefly to
visible, but they reappeared a few minutes later. In front, at a weary
historians’ language.
much of it left.”
cotillion, having completed one of the figures, Natásha, still out of

woman of about forty, with a double chin and full red lips, entered
it and wished to hear it again. In her voice there was a virginal
“Forever?” said the little girl. “Till death itself?”
there was danger, he had hopes of the effect of this last medicine and
were all his enemies and had insulted him, and only now had he at

carts, and their calls to one another, could be clearly heard.
“Reinforcements?” said Napoleon in a tone of stern surprise, looking at

do the right thing.
impossible for him. He looked at Natásha as she sang, and something new
finished phrases of general interest. These sayings were prepared in the

“Surely he will leave something to Borís,” said the countess.
Berg rose and embraced his wife carefully, so as not to crush her lace
at himself. “I had other duties,” thought he. “The people had to be

Princess Mary as she sat listening to the old men’s talk and

The letter was old, having been written before the battle at
“Ah! my dear, I am afraid you and your monk are wasting your
not prove that I could have abstained from lifting it then. And since I
“Just to flutter the nuns a bit. They say there are Italian girls
On what, then, was Count Rostopchín’s fear for the tranquillity of
burning of Moscow, dont les flammes éclairaient sa route. *(2)
out of the carriage and staring at a tall, stout man in a coachman’s
with the cooperation of all, by the millions of generations from our
“To the Emperor.”
like you very much, but please don’t laugh at my people.” After

attention to it. He did not know that it would become more memorable to
At Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Andréevich Bolkónski’s estate, the
has nothing to learn—what softness, tenderness, and strength....”
thought of Sónya, during this stay in Moscow, he said to himself,

expressing himself so artificially because he was talking French.
watched from the various roads by the fugitive Muscovites and by the

rode behind him. Barclay was riding almost beside him, and a crowd of
whiteness, “the peasants at Mozháysk were saying that when they began
was happy. “Left... left... left...” he seemed to repeat to himself
The countess, with a cheerful expression on her face, looked down at her
took it...” he whispered just above Telyánin’s ear.
comrades with mud.
Moscow, and of how some German fellow had been brought to Rostopchín
He surprised me by asking whether I remembered the threefold aim of


returning to his hobby; “tell me how the Germans have taught you to
The same conversation was repeated next day and the day after, and the
another two minutes and it is certain death,” thought each one.
    CHAPTER II
Prince Andrew galloped off to execute the order.
our officers and men at Austerlitz. One had saved a standard, another
summoned the village elder and asked him what he knew about the French,
the latter returned to Russia. In a new country, amid new conditions,
to understand what was revealing itself to me in my dream. One second

cook themselves meals twice a day. In peacetime it is only necessary to
“There now, the gentry and merchants have gone away and left us to
“Well?” returned the old man.
likes her way of reading. She reads to him in the evenings and reads
Just as Prince Andrew met Nesvítski and Zherkóv, there came toward

“How are you, Mary? How did you manage to get here?” said he in a voice
CHAPTER IV

conditions, and to show that all limitations, conflicts, and even

of the Gospel: “In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with

“Wait a moment, I’ll light a candle. You damned rascal, where do you
an allowance of ten thousand rubles. He had a dim perception of the
Donning his court uniform, M. de Beausset ordered a box he had
He entered briskly, with a jerk at every step and his head slightly

Emperor’s feet on his entering the ballroom, the Emperor made a wry face
CHAPTER VIII
“Mamma! What are you saying...”
loved.) “I... but no, I will talk to you later on,” and with a
they do the guns.”
French salesman from one of the Moscow shops.
Guards. Here is my hand on it. Are you satisfied?”
drink?”
in theory rejected the view held by the ancients, it still follows them

subordinate commanders was done, if not by his direct command, at least
with satisfaction, because the self-sacrifice that fills it now...”

fixing his weary eyes on the paper, began to read them with a fixed and
“Sónya, will he live?” she asked. “Sónya, how happy I am, and how
speech by an unexpected cramp in his throat. He paced up and down a
left breast, and stooping down pulled up the left leg of his trousers

nothing is important, it’s all the same—only to save oneself from it
to the province of Smolénsk.”

is, power is power: in other words, power is a word the meaning of which

He and the other prisoners were taken to the right side of the Virgin’s
there are most provisions; and even a dull boy of thirteen could have
fewer, and of still-higher officers of whom there are still fewer,
the enchanted circle I cannot escape from. I am now going to the war,
her as a distant beauty far removed from him, as he had seen her every
nonsense!” he repeated, but still he patted Pierre affectionately
“Very interesting.”

knew better than I did, and now you come to me! How mend matters? There
actors and actresses were robbed.

back!”
CHAPTER XVII

with his thin legs, went up to Kutúzov.
only pressed it to the cold braiding of his hussar’s jacket. Denísov,
quickly!” and she again had difficulty in repressing her sobs.
“Who was that?” asked Borís.
Tsárevo-Zaymíshche—as he had listened to Denísov, and seven years
whom he saw only occasionally. Countess Mary who had brought him up
stretchers came into view before Rostóv. And the fear of death and of


hundred thousand rubles’ worth of goods. Can they be saved when the army
the troops in their disorderly flight confirmed these rumors.
     With these tears that I feel to be flowing.
of the barbarians, or of the decrees of Napoleon III, or of someone’s
still remained a feeling of shame at admitting that they must flee. An
men who commit these crimes, especially their leader, assure themselves
given to directing and commanding, take less part in the direct work.
Morand and Gérard did not take the redoubt but were driven back, and the
Turning the horse sharply, he again jumped the ditch, and deferentially

“But they don’t understand our talk at all,” said the dancer with a
in war on our own frontiers, with and for the King of Prussia. We have
“Well!” he said, turning to his wife.
“A fine thing too!” replied the captain, “and really...”

“How so?” asked Rostóv.
at the beautiful Hélène with her radiant face and at the red, broad,
“Yes.”
“French dresses, French ideas, French feelings! There now, you turned
not by my fault!”
be done now, at that very moment, or it would be too late. He looked
painful to think of the danger, since it is not in man’s power to
flying. Lord have mercy on us sinners!”
encounter with Nicholas in 1805, and many other incidents betokening

and bowed his head, and his eye lit up with a mild and apparently ironic
When she had thrown off her dress and put on a dressing jacket, she sat
heard, and again something in his face twitched—“That is just why
arbitrariness and violence, and regarded him as his bitterest foe. He
everything in the children’s lives that seemed noteworthy to their
prodigy on show and not a human being able to hear or understand what

mysterious and fascinating in Speránski suddenly became plain and
untilled, houses were burned, trade changed its direction, millions
right or wrong is he who says that Napoleon went to Moscow because he
Again Pierre was overtaken by the depression he so dreaded. For three
Frenchman’s smile, pressed the hand held out to him.
At midday on the twenty-second of October Pierre was going uphill along
nothing of the kind. But what awaits us tomorrow? A hundred million most
to take from him a fox-fur coat, he vaguely understood that looting was
whole people. But Smolénsk was burned by its own inhabitants who had

to come to dinner next day, Sunday, and bring a copy of the manifesto
inevitability. In every action we examine we see a certain measure of

beside him and was listening naïvely to his words.
CHAPTER XXVII
as if of its own accord. Toward night candles were burning round his
of the coach with wide open eyes, and the expression in them which the
Natásha’s wedding to Bezúkhov, which took place in 1813, was the last

where to haul it. They haul the log away, and it happens that this is
“I’ll go and ask them again directly,” said Pierre, rising and going to
skin, please think of me.... Perhaps I may prove useful to your Serene
amazement appeared on the Emperor’s face. He took Balashëv by the arm

I stepped on it, but it bent and gave way and I began to clamber up a
sort of borzoi she is,” and turning to his groom, he said he would


examinations to qualify for the grades of Collegiate Assessor and
movements of the mass of which in his regiment he felt himself a tiny,
existence he learned every day, he felt that now, in 1809, here in
with the external world in time and in dependence on cause, that is, it
In what does the substance of those reproaches lie?
Moscow? Yes, here it lies before me, but why is the deputation from the
am sitting on a barrel and working in a dirty shed?” the expression of
contrasted with his flattering words, “on the contrary, your
impenetrable eyes, and felt that it had been ridiculous of him to have
noiseless, convulsive sobs which choked her. Márya Dmítrievna glanced
room without a word. But at the door he stopped and then retraced his
“Why aren’t you serving in the army?”
was fought.


Gobelin tapestries and Persian carpets in the house. When Natásha set

Pierre’s eyes with it and tied it in a knot behind, catching some
Makárin embraced Anatole with tears in his eyes.
and calling the nurse began giving the medicine. The child screamed
Andrew in his boyhood, helped Pierre out of his carriage, said that the
“I have.”
preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

streams; and try as he would he could descry no military “position” in
those who were guiding him.

His face again resumed its former stiff and cold expression. But the
that his heart stood still. His hand trembled as he gave his horse into
“But here was a fairy forest with black moving shadows, and a glitter
Only in our self-confident day of the popularization of knowledge—thanks


“What makes you think so? You think I may hope? You think...?”
CHAPTER X

wasn’t it so, your excellency?” and again Timókhin turned to the prince.
alive and wishing to live—nor you either.”
Denísov nice?” she asked.
Napoleon, accentuating each syllable, as with a composure and assurance
went in with Nicholas. After them other couples followed, filling the
At Smolénsk the armies at last reunited, much as Bagratión disliked it.
and thousands of carts conveyed the inhabitants and their possessions
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
something and went away. It seemed to Pierre that even the prince was
once again, as usurpations of power. And so these historians also see
chair for himself, and Berg and Véra immediately began their evening
significance of the burning of Moscow, and looked at the fires with
remain a secret, and should you find that you do not love me, or should
can’t understand. I was there all the time giving orders and had only

of the Frenchmen with the gunners ended, whether the red-haired gunner
the great standing armies should be reduced henceforth to mere guards

impossible for him to live otherwise than as he did and that he had

him!”
blushed.
“Why, that one, right at the end, the big one. Don’t you see?
untied the ropes. The body collapsed. The soldiers dragged it awkwardly
was always ready to render the small services for which she had a gift,
carrying them off their feet and engulfing them all. The dragoon was

the marshal to the least soldier, that place was not the Vozdvízhenka,
his elbows high arranged the reins deliberately. Anatole and Dólokhov
Oudinot’s carriages. In April the Pávlograds were stationed immovably
to defend the left flank.

negotiations except on condition that... Here Balashëv hesitated:
at one another, and that look saved Pierre. Apart from conditions of war

CHAPTER IV
little Nicholas did love his uncle, but loved him with just a shade of
noticed that he was pale and that his jaw quivered and shook as if in an
knew that he was face to face with death. When he came to himself after
within grapeshot range now.”
with Sónya and Borís, and Véra with a subtle smile was saying

trying to imagine Karatáev’s opinion on the subject. “He would not have

weary of it and it was not at all what he wanted. He turned away and

generalized into one event in accord with the result produced by that
more than Timókhin had done when he was reprimanded by the regimental
a soldier, Aunt, I don’t force myself on anyone or refuse anything,” he
Not letting the abbé and Pierre escape, Anna Pávlovna, the more

collected his men and with shouts and quarrels forced his way in among
    * “He is charming; he has no sex.”
gate in a wooden fence and, stopping, pointed out to him a small wooden
his mouth awry, prepared to shout. The regiment fluttered like a bird
On the third day after Kutúzov’s report a country gentleman arrived from
them) were to be tried for incendiarism. On the third day he was taken
“It’s not there.”
“Count! Count!” shouted Berg who ran up from the other side as eager
“All the same, it was Bilíbin who found a suitable form for the
position was most difficult all through the Russo-French wars from
Bilíbin wrinkled up the skin over his eyebrows and pondered, with a


“But I wish it,” he said. “I beg you—give it him!”
lived. But now it is too late. I know it!”
“Papa! Mamma! May I see to it? May I?...” asked Natásha. “We will still
It was now hot spring weather. The whole forest was already clothed in
Toward evening he ceased moaning and became quite still. He did not know
gone out of the conservatory she followed and called Borís to her.
Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number of
convoy with their own small forces. On October 22 it was moving from
calm, his eyes closed, and they could see his regular breathing.
Oh, how I would guard him, how I would tell him the truth, how I would

Pierre distinctly heard the pleasantly human voice of the Emperor saying
eyes at her sister-in-law.
man’s penetration he understood all that was passing in Bolkónski’s
on the cot.
continually absorbed his attention. And Pierre, without trying to
bodies from the largest to the smallest have the property of attracting
“I suppose it has to be like this!” she thought. She kept looking


ought to be, and the more amazed at my genius.”
after the storm; drops still continued to fall, but vertically now, and
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
something with an expression of mingled joy and sorrow.
twenty wagons, not more than sixty now remained; the rest had been
    CHAPTER V
hurriedly interrupting Bagratión.
of agreement with which for fifteen years he had been accustomed to
to the accountant, “but he feels a pain in the pit of his stomach
His plate seemed to him not quite clean, and pointing to a spot he
“But what is the matter with you, Count? You are not like yourself....”


“Yes, so it is, so it is,” said the general angrily, lowering the
Commentaries), and resting on his elbow, began reading it in the middle.

Natásha looked at her with eyes full of tears and in her look there was
the theater of war and on the army’s direct line of march, and advised

understand it; I don’t in the least understand why men can’t live

or knew where he was.
Nicholas, and Pétya took off their wraps and sat down on the sofa.

around them cannon balls were flying, of which he was aware not so
shyness that surprised him for an instant.
come immediately. Perhaps he has come and is sitting in the drawing

There were a great many ladies and some of Nicholas’ Moscow

No, but I know I must work to comfort my mother, to repay you, and not
called out to Denísov.
Beneath his smile Rostóv saw in him the mood he had shown at the club
He is pushed into a meeting of the legislature. In alarm he wishes to


“My desire is never to leave you, Father, never to separate my
“With a short coat and his hair cropped; just as if, well, just as if he
Saying this he again turned round, dropped his hands, took the bottle

Russia, and not let the army get discouraged.

round the two corners of the mouth; this, together with the resolute,
as those who lived in Moscow, and where fire had the same property of
ribbon round the left arm.
not right.”
Next day the following letter was sent to Napoleon:
When he got home he could not sleep for a long time for thinking of what
from a dream and lifted his head.
The Emperor knit his brows with dissatisfaction and, glancing back,
me—Denísov and Natásha... Natásha is absurd. How she rules over him! And
done at all, but this untiring, continual spiritual effort of which the
of the moment. In reality, however, all these movements forward and


retreat, the burning of Moscow, the capture of marauders, the seizure of
“Don’t talk rubbish...” said Prince Andrew, smiling and looking

completely accomplished as that to which all Kutúzov’s efforts were
Denísov seemed to have forgotten Pétya’s very existence. He turned to
know that ourselves!” Another, without looking round, as though
another they presented projects of maneuvers to be made with those
recaptured by the French and shot.
bosom seemed to inhale not air but the strength of eternal youth and

He asked, “Whose company?” but he really meant, “Are you

concluded by making what amounted to a demand that Pierre should give
to Africa. Again so-called chance accompanies him. Impregnable Malta
not be executed. After passing through Borodinó the vice-King was driven
conditions, whose action was performed very recently, and the causes of
If, observing himself, man sees that his will is always directed by
room, something flew out from a side door like a tornado and began
shall receive my letter,” Balashëv felt convinced that Napoleon would
who hate us, love of our enemies; yes, that love which God preached on
    CHAPTER XXII
The Russian officer in charge of the transport lolled back in the front

in the drawing room, waiting for Borís to come out. She was already
of its own life. By the indefinite signs which, even at a distance,

“Not Bonaparte. He is the Emperor! Sacré nom...!” cried he angrily.
how have I obtained all this? Chiefly by knowing how to choose my
with cold glassy eyes that boded no good, they became silent. On the
so my conscience was at ease. I came forward....” (Berg stood up and
CHAPTER IX
“Well, as you see. So far everything’s all right, but I confess I
which he had prepared himself, “or shall I remain with your honor?”

one son was out of danger she became the more anxious about Pétya.

to describe the same event, the replies they give immediately lose all
it necessary to tell Natásha of Prince Andrew’s wound and of his being
“Why did I utter those words? It was by some accident I said them....

rank (for he did nothing), that Prince Vasíli had procured for him,
not knowing whether it would be proper to call the dying man “the
find an answer to these terrible questions.
thought he.



bodice, with black curls tossed backward, thin bare arms, little legs
One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young man with
Uhlans appeared from round the corner. The Uhlans came up at a trot to


It was long since the Rostóvs had news of Nicholas. Not till midwinter

changed; there was no longer the former poetic and mystic charm of
“If you like, your honor!”
did he write in a letter to Paris that “the battle field was superb,”
men nor fodder for the horses had been issued. As no transports could

“That’s as may happen,” answered Rostóv. “Karáy, here!” he
“Tomorrow we shall have to deal with Kutúzov!” said Napoleon. “We shall
the Freemasons he had experienced the feeling of one who confidently
be defended, and an officer sent to inspect the locality comes in and
“Where is the princess?” he asked. “Hiding?”
could not move it. He smashed a pane.
Petersburg, on their estate near Moscow, or with her mother, that is to


Having put on French greatcoats and shakos, Pétya and Dólokhov rode to
“But that is my conviction, and judging by the last letter with which
are now two Russians, Milorádovich, and Dokhtúrov, and there would be
world and like herself were garnering the last ears of the harvests they
the village of Shámshevo. The men crowded together round the campfires.

French had captured the flèches and the village of Semënovsk, Kutúzov,
How I love you!”
him, Prince Andrew on the eve of battle felt agitated and irritable as
Solomon. Pierre respected this class of Brothers to which the elder ones
One was on a white horse. Prince Bagratión and Prince Dolgorúkov with
windows, icons, woodwork, and still unbuttressed walls, and should be

his broadsheets. They knew that it was for the army to fight, and that
death of her brothers had become one of the richest heiresses in Moscow,

“What’s the good of denying it, my dear? Our dear countess was too

“But why, Count, why?” she almost cried, unconsciously moving closer to
taking a letter addressed in a woman’s hand from a bag hanging above
“You’re a first-class liar, Kiselëv, when I come to look at you!”
The two first were convicts with shaven heads. One was tall and thin,
the prince was lying on the sofa, looked at him, noticed his perturbed

been to his captors; and in fact the guard of the second day did not
Order after order was issued by the French commanders that day
not you! Go back or I’ll flatten you into a pancake,” repeated he.
princess’ face. She took it quickly and bent her head over it.
“Mamma darling, it’s not at all so... my poor, sweet darling,” she
on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree
“and tell our brave men and all my good subjects wherever you go that
He handed the horses over to the soldier who was stirring the pot and
For people accustomed to think that plans of campaign and battles are
actions are evidently pitiful and mean, but again an inexplicable chance
post of commander in chief as a reward for his victory, does not give up
He did not finish speaking. At one and the same moment came the sound of

himself, but she felt that his incomprehensible words had an improper
first place because her provinces have been pillaged—they say the Holy
with her better spirits.
“He has gone to Peters... But I don’t know,” said Pierre.
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
Moscow forty times forty churches—but yesterday a deserter was knouted
matter.
rubles, Dólokhov lived with him and had placed himself on such a

The weather had cleared again since noon and the sun was descending
seen him since we acted together at the Rumyántsovs’ theatricals. I
her husband, to whom she had from the first moment given herself up

thick-set general with grizzled eyebrows and whiskers, and wider from
destruction, for a great city with wooden buildings was certain when
him into the arcade. Some soldiers started running away in a group. A
pity, and when she wept her radiant eyes acquired an irresistible charm.
dull eyes looked at him in silence. It seemed to Prince Andrew that the
Makár Alexéevich was standing with parted lips, swaying, as if about to
“Allow me to look at your purse,” he said in a low, almost
Natásha continued to lean out of the window for a long time, beaming at
look forward very much to your return....’ Yes, yes, how did she say it?

really had made the house stuffy.
understand his aims. To judge a man who is in disfavor and to throw on
she had entered. She knew it to be necessary, and though it was hard for
two hundred men, was moved forward into a trampled oatfield in the gap
conflict, and (3) The attainment of the chief virtue—love of death.

Then with the unerring official memory that characterized him he

“Come into the courtyard or you’ll be seen; she’ll come out directly,”

the village again, but Túshin’s guns could not move, and the

“Saber him!” the dragoon officer almost whispered.

voices was audible through the closed window.
Moscow, or victory, or glory (what need had he for any more glory?). The

that nothing is left for an intelligent and good man but to live out
    CHAPTER IV
I was only joking,” he said, smiling shyly and trying to efface his
of examples, if our observation is constantly directed to seeking the
remark on that occasion. The foreigners were deported to Nízhni by
By the side of the path, on the dusty dry grass, all sorts of household
higher ground it was clearing, but nothing could be seen of what was
to his trap muttering something to himself as he went, and took his
clear to all what could be ventured against the French and what could
Prince Andrew, who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness of
his uniform wearing all his orders and go down the garden to review his
one thing he wished for was rest, tranquillity, and freedom. But when he
“No,” replied Princess Mary.
remarks, recalling the doctor’s uneasiness and his wife’s delight, now
a wounded French general, whom the officers surrounded. Crowds of
his invasion were connected in their minds with the same sort of vague


mentioned during the journey.
mortification, our opinion of Bonaparte cannot alter. We shall not cease
writer, opinion as to what is good for mankind changes; so that what
me. ‘Everyone fears a bear,’ he says, ‘but when you see one your

for the good we have done them.’ Father took her when she was homeless
On returning late in the evening Sónya went to Natásha’s room, and
one another uninterruptedly, the man hung the leg bands up on some pegs
to Moscow that the wine was drawn and must be drunk. Had Napoleon then
“The island of Madagascar,” she said, “Ma-da-gas-car,” she
Madame de Souza. He began reading about the sufferings and virtuous
“Let us go and have supper,” he said with a sigh, going to the door.
“Well, go on!” said his son.
the Emperor’s suite. One officer told Rostóv that he had seen someone
a sleigh drawn by two gray trotting-horses that were bespattering the
me: it hurts the same whichever finger gets bitten. But if Platón hadn’t
Natásha, stopping suddenly. “I feel so happy!”
round Sónya and Natásha as the air does before a thunderstorm. Sónya
his arm, began a long-drawn-out soldiers’ song, commencing with the



“My friend,” said Anna Mikháylovna in gentle tones, addressing
that day and wished to convey. “He was such a delightful old man, and


One of the players said he hoped he might be trusted.
“Oh, is it you, Prince, who have freed your serfs?” said an old man

these formed the entrance and vestibule. The trench itself was the room,
victory over Buonaparte at Eylau. In Petersburg everyone is rejoicing,
captured several hundred prisoners in the course of a month; and there

when he slept. Nicholas suddenly moved and cleared his throat. And at
displeasure at the poor success of our forces and the slowness of their
town past the cathedral on the right, where a service was being held and
and still the same and in the same place. No, it can’t be! Surely it
administrators) that he controlled the external actions of Moscow’s
could not remember what it was that people say. He looked at her face.
maximum. Kutúzov saw this and merely sighed and shrugged his shoulders.
time all that pure, spiritual, inward travail through which she had
the inhabitants of the district.
the commissariat department in that town.
aware of his weaknesses.

in the same tone.

It seemed to Natásha that even at the time she first saw Prince Andrew
him what consolation I can.”




toward him with a terrific whizz, and then he shuddered and sat up. He
masses of troops—ours and the enemy’s. The ground to the right—along the

nowhere else for the family to talk but here at the ball. She did not
The staff officer and Prince Andrew mounted their horses and rode on.

before coming to the dinner he had had his hair and whiskers trimmed,

now told about that affair!”
so-called battle of the three Emperors—that is to say, a slow movement
effort. The bottle was emptying perceptibly and rising still higher
and making a wide sweep with his arm, amid a thunder of applause and
eyes!” thought Natásha. “And what do his father and sister matter



the room next to the one where the prince lay. Several times, waking up,
“What could we fasten this onto?” asked the servants, trying to fix a
“They’ll put it out, no fear!”
progress of affairs and approving and disapproving with full right to do

ladies. Natásha came into the room, went up to Sónya, glanced at
knew... it’s the devil knows what!”
new pair of handsome silk-embroidered braces that, for some reason,
Nesvítski closed their eyes. At the same instant they heard a report
carriage, and the count himself, his coachman, and his dragoons
“Oh, yes,” said Pétya, nodding at the first words Denísov uttered as if
in his tone, “my dear,” whether they were above or below him in
wrinkled; he waved his arm at Toll and turned to the opposite side of
philosophizing voice with pleasure.
western forces push toward the east several times in 1805, 1806, 1807,
with her son. The son is getting married! Then Bezúkhov, eh? He is here

doubt, and self-derision, which appeared on his face against his will,
    * “Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood.”


European sovereigns a malicious conspiracy, the sole object of which was
was sitting beside him, by the hand. Rostóv was struck by the

wounded men had stopped in the street.
excitement at being grown-up and in a perpetual ecstatic hurry not to
going out, and Rostóv heard the hoofs of several horses splashing
said, without noticing Nicholas.
them? Can the French be so enormously superior to us that when we had



as Great Mytíshchi. At ten o’clock that evening the Rostóv family and
overnight to Shámshevo to capture a “tongue.” But whether because he
gelding, sitting at home in winter, and lying in his overgrown garden in
her friend as if she did not consider her worthy to hear what she meant
shouted Denísov, suddenly, turning purple and rushing at the man with
“Be quite easy,” he continued playfully, as he adroitly took the gold
under her little feet to keep them from the damp, another hung his coat
hare’s muddy pad. “You’ve deserved it, that’s it, come on!”
understand how one can live with such ideas. I had such moments
It’s too late now when Vienna is occupied by the French army!”

approach her after the old prince had gone out and they were left alone
gallop and using his leather whip, rode an officer, disheveled and
Everything essential had already been done; feet, hands, necks, and

that Napoleon had power and so events occurred; with some effort one may
August had still been green islands amid black fields and stubble, had
CHAPTER VIII
without his noticing it the feeling of offense immediately turned into
troops had already entered Prussia and our second war with Napoleon

should have at their head a man who could justify to himself and to them
himself.... Not a word! About some Denísov or other, though he himself,

activity, nor even by a combination of the two as historians have


adjutants general were there because they always accompanied the
Mávra Kuzmínichna opened the gate and an officer of eighteen, with the


caught but a glimpse of this, his whole attention was directed to the
Pétya ought to have known that he was in a forest with Denísov’s

Natásha quietly repeated her question, and her face and whole

thought Nicholas, and looked sternly at his sister, trying to make her
“What do you mean? For God’s sake... If you tell, you are my
the order: (1) The preservation and study of the mystery. (2) The

same now?” thought he. “And what will be there, and what has there been
oppose no reasonable ideal to the insensate Napoleonic ideal of

at the bottom of the sleigh beside Rostóv, who grew more and more
idea.

and delight in, herself. “How charming that Natásha is!” she said
“He sees well enough,” he added. “And what I am so pleased about,” he
mud results; and in the same way the entry of the famished army into the

“Dieu sait quand reviendra. Go to the dining room.”
terms with his superiors, and a moral young man with a brilliant career
him. And Tíkhon, purposely writhing and making faces, pretended to be

we should attack their line of communication. He began explaining his
merely looked in front of him without straining his eyes.
Well, what of it... do what’s necessary...” said the count, muttering
He said the people had been getting arms in the Krémlin, and that though



“Andrew, au nom de Dieu!” *(2) Princess Mary repeated.

began to talk about her.
big people I write a note: ‘Princess So-and-So desires an interview
    CHAPTER VII
nothing more important...” he paused, “than to have a good sleep.”
last only his white plumes were visible to Rostóv from amid the suites
of these projects. But even that he cannot do. Events and time do not
came and began relating various adventures. His coming vexed me from the

a treat to her guests. As a clever maître d’hôtel serves up as a
quickly and began to pace the room.
to one another freely, but another motive was to avoid the danger of

once.”
(2) to vanquish lust by self-restraint and repulsion, (3) to withdraw
satisfied the need seen in its most elementary form in a child, when it


himself.

Princess Anna Mikháylovna intervened in the conversation, evidently

brave officer,” thought Bagratión. Prince Andrew, without replying,
a white waistcoat so long that it covered his rotund stomach, white
advantageously, as long as no one asks what is the security behind them.

you’re not angry with me! Tell me everything—the whole truth. What
many as you want, or all if you like....”
“Mary,” she said timidly, drawing Princess Mary’s hand to herself,
Bourienne rapidly, in her pleasant mellow tones and with guttural r’s.

Next, bolts for the doors of the new building were wanted and had to be
extremely pleasant to him. He thanked the soldier and began to eat.
ignorance of what steps to take, and the enormous number of advisers and
to blame all round. Well, what else do you want?...”

over the squadron. Rostóv raised his saber, ready to strike, but at
he had abandoned everything and not left the city, but remained there

badly daubed pictures in clear daylight and without a glass. “Yes,
line followed them across and the last Cossacks quitted the farther side
humanity and of the peoples, the first question—in the absence of a
man of middle height, and in a white uniform, who stood by a window


disheveled from the nursery in her dressing gown, and with joyful face
happiness. The presence of Sónya, of her beloved Natásha, or even of
All the evening Nicholas paid attention to a blue-eyed, plump and
Zakhár, while still keeping his arms extended, raised one hand with the
peasantry of those parts the mysterious undercurrents in the life of
consolation? What evil and error are there in it, if people were dying
family. His wife’s demands astonished him, but they also flattered him,
The last of the infantry hurriedly crossed the bridge, squeezing
against the senator who was introducing this set and narrow attitude
was humiliating, in her position rose vividly to her mind. “They, the

In regard to philanthropy, the greatest virtue of crowned heads,
Next day he woke late. Recalling his recent impressions, the first

and had an opinion about everything), but above all at his capacity for
“Peter Kirílovich, come here! We have recognized you,” he now seemed
knapsacks with flour and sunflower seeds. Just then Ferapóntov returned

hearing the terrible sounds of the crowd, Rostopchín grew physically

more, we find at one and the same time quite contradictory views as to

lit wisps of straw and ran after him, shouting, “Vive l’Empereur!”
into many. Each drop tried to spread out and occupy as much space as
French, collecting booty, cared only for gold. Not only was the
sprawling!”
“Perhaps the count did not ask for me,” said Pierre when he reached
him all the blame of other men’s mistakes is very easy, but I maintain
“But you see what he writes...” said another, pointing to a printed
at Markóv, probably expecting Markóv to pick it up for him, and how
deep breath after stooping, but refrained from doing so and breathed
Mytíshchi she moved into a worse hut simply to be farther away from the
his in the diplomatic service.
Conjectures as to Napoleon’s awareness of the danger of extending his
“No-o-o!” muttered Dólokhov through his teeth, “no, it’s not
thin lips interrupted Weyrother, wishing to say something. But the
everybody advised making the attempt. After much disputing and arguing,
“If only I had known...” she said through her tears. “I was afraid to
his face, nor a single gesture. She caught the unfinished word in its
middle of the muddy road.
All who could walk went together, and after the third stage Pierre had
room, from whence came sounds of several laughing voices.
with satisfaction as he poured the water over his head with hands

I alone have any influence with my father, and now and then can save him
well-lit anteroom where they took off their cloaks without the aid of
“Oh, yes!” said Pierre, with a forced smile. “I am very grateful
“The colonel of those Württembergers is delightful,” he suddenly said.
and I’ll write to her myself, and we will kill the fatted calf.”
With a merry, smiling face Pierre was sorting his purchases.
on the table, again bound his eyes.
What causes historical events? Power. What is power? Power is the
love, and that she did.
rose and with her heavy tread went up to the table. She took a sheet of
party.



falling from the window, she listened to the words of the service which
a feeling of contemptuous ill will. He snorted whenever he mentioned
might think they were nobles.”
“And why is it?”
Russia. Alexander I gives a command and the French submit to the
the left, and took up the bottle. Anatole brought two candles and
the right flank of the Preobrazhénsk battalion and came straight up to
by his clothes and manner of speaking Pierre at once knew him to be a


opposite, in front of which large masses of French were advancing.
said without sitting down. “A person of very high standing in our
French have it.
they are, there... you can see them.”
useful only because he had a Russian name.
doctor’s wife, who was calling him her deliverer, and recalling with

confusing their minds by dwelling on mystical books that merely awaken
losing his temper. “I shall answer for it and not you, and you’d
the frightened face and the figure could not be altered, and that
say she has millions. Oh yes, that’s the French ambassador himself!”
without his greatcoat, with his Orders on his breast and an enormous
at all in accord with the accepted tone of the moment. But the general
“Hurrah!” and resolved that tomorrow, come what might, he would join the
crush the contemptible detachment that stood before him.
this house and in Brünn itself. I want to entertain him as far as I
seemed to say. “You had not noticed that I am a woman? Yes, I am a
“What orders, your excellency?” said the huntsman in his deep bass,
crack in the wall. A cock crowed far off and another replied near
narrow, confined frame, when life, all life with all its joys, is open
Rostóv went to meet them.
her mother’s room. His face was puckered up and wet with tears. He
resumed its former cold, artificial expression. She returned to the
Mary: that she purposely worried and irritated him, and that by
and what I wrote to Joseph Alexéevich. I told my wife that I begged her
but they all were involuntary tools of history, carrying on a work
Kochubéy, and Strógonov—whom he himself in jest had called his
him from me, and he laughed, shut his eyes, and clung to me. I’m sure
mother. He first implored her to forgive him and Sónya and consent to
anger and walking up to the regiment wished to find a further excuse for
presented itself to him—not in relation to any worldly matter or with
were not to be sent to work, assistance was to be given to the serfs,

Moscow and of a leaflet in circulation stating that Napoleon promised
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
was as if the sky were melting and sinking to the earth without any
When a man works alone he always has a certain set of reflections which
“But if I want to...”
constitutes the essence of freedom) he cannot imagine life. He feels
her hand on her beautiful, fully expanded bosom and looking up to
Early in the year 1806 Nicholas Rostóv returned home on leave. Denísov
November, the last day of the Krásnoe battles, it was already growing


“Well, General, it all looks like war,” as if regretting a circumstance

he would sell for two thousand rubles; incomprehensible as it
she suddenly came into his mind as she was at the moments when he had
Next day Pierre came to say good-by. Natásha was less animated than
and at the beginning of August showed that they expected this. Those who
is, what he was feeling) and those unfortunates who evidently did not
alone together, Prince Vasíli announced his hopes and wishes to the old
after talking with Magnítski, let you know what may interest you, and
restore the daughter to her mother and go to save someone else. Pierre
Germans, and everyone was convinced that a dangerous muddle had been
a long while specially surprised and delighted him were the women, young
has lived through.
pierced his skull.
“Come along, our Matvévna!” he said to himself. “Matvévna” *
but one thing disconcerted her. “Can a man so important and necessary to
“Six hundred rubles, ace, a corner, a nine... winning it back’s

necessity the smaller the conception of freedom and vice versa.





which is the only thing we need fear, or he is changing his position.”
red hands; he did not know, as the saying is, how to enter a drawing
Prince Andrew did not see how and by whom it was replaced, but the

understand why he suddenly felt all alone in the world.
at once lit up for me my whole past and the future path I should follow.
that will by others.
him with bags and charges. The guns of that battery were being fired
reports from our scouts. Here are two letters from Count Nostitz and
yards wide as the people on both sides made way for him. Borís noticed

Emperor, though he met him twice, did not favor him with a single word.
the baggage wagons had all crossed, the crush was less, and the last
specially amiable mood that day.

evidently felt frightened and ashamed to have accepted charity in a
need of any other or better husband, but as all the powers of her soul
“You will soon be dressing your men in petticoats! What is this?”
though it was not at all the time for tea.
special messenger, a police officer, had come from Count Rostopchín to
“Pe... Pétya... Go, go, she... is calling...” and weeping like a child
“Ma foi!” said he, “tomorrow we shall see all that on the
not even think or find time to think, but only talked, and talked
“You’re welcome, Yákov Alpátych. Folks are leaving the town, but you
Gutenberg-tm License.

“Natásha, you love me?” she said in a soft trustful whisper. “Natásha,
the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name
was Madame Schoss, but perhaps it’s not, and this Circassian with the



most important that the sinewy white arm he was flourishing should be
on this), while she was very young. Thirdly, he had a son whom it would
    SECOND EPILOGUE
“Smack at ‘em, lads!” he kept saying, seizing the guns by the

Next day the French army did not renew their attack, and the remnant of
gloomily frowning and smoking a pipe, and little one-armed Túshin still
moment had arrived. With the air of a practical Petersburg lady she now,
the toe as gladly as she had to the sounds of her own voice. Passing a

part in, and for the first time in his life the possibility of death


passage to the stairs and, frowning and rubbing his forehead with
     License.  You must require such a user to return or

recognizing the voice of his young prince.
“I bet fifty imperials”—he spoke French that the Englishman might
“And this is gratitude—this is recognition for those who have
needed which he did not possess.
mental activity is to you or me. You can’t help thinking. I go to bed
at the council of war in 1805: there was now a panic fear of Napoleon’s
he regarded such a refusal as a slur on his father’s memory, which he
Adráksin shouted at Pierre:
Twenty-three soldiers, three officers, and two officials were confined
“No! What is there to talk about?” said Pierre. “It’s all the
And lastly, the final departure of the great Emperor from his heroic
to occur. The superior officers all wanted to distinguish themselves,
when you please, and I give you my word of honor that no one shall dare
natural to him was very gentle and wary with them both at dinner. On
“A charming lady, a divine one. Her eyes” (Nicholas looked at his

whirling black ball, and his sudden rush of passionate love of life.
as Natásha and was therefore surprised on entering the drawing room
The aim of cutting off Napoleon and his army never existed except in
Whenever I see the movement of a locomotive I hear the whistle and see
stand?... You know, Count, there’ll be a battle tomorrow. Out of an army

are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent
without boasting that it was a little better than at Ulm...”
Sergéy Kuzmích...’ Poor Vyazmítinov could not get any farther!
commuted for a quitrent. A trained midwife was engaged for Boguchárovo
Russian commanders, those favorable to the French—and even the Frenchmen
at once showed itself by countless signs. These signs were: Lauriston’s
devotion, submission, and the poetry of Christian self-sacrifice, now
own breast, the husband standing by and gazing tenderly at her and the
had sown in earlier years. But to the old countess those contemporaries
puddles!” said the esaul, screwing up his glittering eyes.

He indicated a place beside him to his daughter-in-law. A footman moved
“Well, and is that all?” he asked.
“To return to your ladies—I hear they are lovely. What a wretched idea
even try to do so. All were watching the count and Márya Dmítrievna.
the village of Stromílova to Dmítrovsk.

Preis geben,” * said one of them.
In Kiev Pierre found some people he knew, and strangers hastened to make
him and inquired where the commander and officers were. The man,

of the wall. “Who is that man?” said he, looking sternly at Pierre.
crime, a good action, or even one that is simply nonmoral, we ascribe a
“But I can’t live without him!” cried Natásha.
and others like them walking singly across the field shouting and
Dólokhov a hundred times. “Didn’t I explain to you that I have come



(2) The movement of nations is caused not by power, nor by intellectual
house two doors off. The whole household, servants included, was bright
Again he replied that he could not answer it.
previously. It was seething in its depths. Historic figures were not
and no one knew where he was. The officer snatched a little food at
state of the political thermometer of legitimate Petersburg court
innumerable circumstances was needed without anyone of which the event
Borís quietly left the room and went in search of Natásha. The plump
the French.

in the same order in which they had entered but with redder faces, the

deep as a proto-deacon’s and hoarse with hallooing—and two flashing

not to the fourth but to the fifteenth of October—that plan never was or
predestined path are unsuccessful: he is not received into the Russian
“He is one of the most remarkable, but to me most unpleasant of
wonder-working icon of Smolénsk.
for him to inspire the people in the capitals and arouse the nation in

“Put him there.”
first not only what had been said but also what Kutúzov would have
What Pierre did not know was that the place where they presented him
waiting for—some important relation who has not yet arrived, or a dish
run to the gate and hit the cow on the head. The only thing to be said
Kolochá, and had he not then ordered an immediate attack on the redoubt
lost count of his children, but this Pierre was his favorite.”

and Pétya—whom she had drawn into the business of packing—press on the
road from Moscow to Vyázma without any battle?” But drawing from his
accustomed to that idea and have become so used to it that the question:
Pávlovna’s usual pink notes with an invitation to which was added:
“I’ll stand, Theodore Iványch.”
large dark ballroom. All was the same: there were the same old card
translated what the German said to the captain and gave the captain’s
know how it was that within five minutes she had come to feel herself
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or

suite who had mimicked the regimental commander, fell back from the


The unknown general looked disdainfully down at Kozlóvski, who was
at leaving home for the first time in his life on bad terms with him,
defended them. Young Count Toll objected to the Swedish general’s views
grandeur enabled his son to play stick and ball with the terrestrial

what they were saying, she softly left the room and went to the nursery.

    CHAPTER X
this dreadful, inextricable position!” he suddenly began to pray. “Yes,
it proved that the force which decides the fate of peoples lies not in
among which figured the names of Túchkov, Bagratión, and Kutáysov. In
Under the influence of the wine he had drunk, and after the days he had

mistakes, he is drawn into a conspiracy that aims at seizing power and
the declaration from Petersburg gave him particular pleasure, and that
trying to attract as little attention as possible, he left the room.
from the French and standing in front of the Preobrazhénsk regiment.
of the men like a child.
Barclay stood for caution. The Tsarévich hinted at treachery and
Bolkhovítinov, entering the open door which he had found by feeling in
“No, but imagine the old Countess Zúbova, with false curls and her
so as not to be in her way.


her, feeling that she was in no mood for their conversation. Count

“No, you can’t understand what I learned from that illiterate man—that
don’t move. Shouldn’t we put a cordon round to prevent the rest from

his host and hostess. He walked in rapidly, bowing to right and left
“I was told it would be dangerous because of the enemy. Dear friend, I
lost his head, and that it was probable that he had an understanding
looks at the approaching dogs and sportsmen.
was stricter.”

“I’ll give you a hundwed sharp lashes—that’ll teach you to play the
     Chief Executive and Director
this and guessed its reason.
filled with her firm, bold writing.
weary, and distracted air, though at the same time he was haughty and
Napoleon, standing on the knoll, looked through a field glass, and in
interplay of intrigues, aims, and wishes among those who took part in
functions remains unnoticed. She talked only because she physically

through the smoke. He was pressing one hand to his left side, while
This was true. The architect had told him that it was necessary, and
To the third party—in which the Emperor had most confidence—belonged the
first fortification but was driven back, for on emerging from the wood
about with a smile.
“There’ll hardly be another such chance to fall on a transport as today.
same!” Pierre often indulged in reflections of this sort, nullifying
said to be fleeing in great disorder. Mind you gallop off to Kórchevo
history books say he did) the position of the Russians from Utítsa
first-born more than all her other children and even reproached herself

of corpses. The keeper opens the two center partitions to examine


“What does harm to another is wrong,” said Pierre, feeling with
Without replying either to his wife or his mother-in-law, Pierre late
drove away with their swords the crowd of prisoners who were gazing at

of Eau de Cologne. His full face, rather young-looking, with its
and retired to his apartments directly after dinner. In the evening,
matters. Listening to Bennigsen and the generals criticizing the

wearing a blue swallow-tail coat, shoes and stockings, and was perfumed

it. If you refuse him on my account, I must tell you the whole truth. I

we may consider, we always regard it as the result partly of man’s free
general conclusion which he had arrived at from his interview with
dwarfs and one peasant woman will toss three of them with a hayfork.”
Anna Pávlovna’s presentiment was justified, and all that morning a

agree.”

wealth, freedom, and enlightenment of the people, how is it that Louis
CHAPTER IV
when, seeing these girls, he realized the existence of other human
being plowed a second time.
Before the beginning of the campaign, Rostóv had received a letter from
held out his cheek.

side and flourishing the whip.
the village, and over the fields the larks rose trilling, one after
permission.”
prisoners, it was found that in the bustle of leaving Moscow one Russian
was told to go. He rose and tried to walk, but staggered and would have
pressed two fingers together and the badge was between them. Then he
the so-called Duke of Elchingen (Ney) ventured to remark that a movement
events. His actions—without the smallest deviation—were all directed

pleasure to herself and to all around her. “I have brought my work,”
with her long lashes drooping as if she did not see or feel what the
made out estimates at ten times their value for government stores that

Cossacks and then the first and second squadrons of hussars and infantry
ball at General Kíkin’s and that Ermólov was probably there too.
a scoundrel, but our ladies crawl after him on their knees. I went to
“No, no, please not... You are Mademoiselle Bourienne,” said
of debauchery; but to promise a maid to marry her... to deceive, to
mot d’ordre...” cried Dólokhov suddenly flaring up and riding straight
smile.
growled at everybody because he thought he was being pushed and that

From the regimental commander’s, Denísov rode straight to the staff
And while he was doing M. de Beausset the honor of breakfasting with
but sang with her for a long time and then at last dragged her off, and


bending his forehead to hers just touched it, and pressed her hand so
win a campaign. For that, not storming and attacking but patience and
estates.”
voice.
and other things they do not like were simply the product of Napoleon’s
on the basis of an abstract notion—science, that is, the supposed
When Prince Andrew reached the room prepared for him and lay down in a
Only Countess Hélène, considering the society of such people as the

sounds of canister shot, one after another. The shot rattled against
The countess lifted her head and looked attentively at her daughter.


presence.
countess and that it was necessary to say something to her. Hardly
to. We were terribly absurd. I had a funny doll then and wanted to give
Andrew watched the commander in chief’s face attentively, and the only
he followed the maid, overtook her, and came out on the Povarskóy. The

“Just see, the German sausage is making tracks, too!”
days at the Karágins’, and every day on thinking the matter over
the beginning of any event—the position from which we always contemplate
Pétya was not at home, he had gone to visit a friend with whom he meant
The Russian army was commanded by Kutúzov and his staff, and also by the

table and placed on it his small leather-gloved hands.
festive in his air, which, in conjunction with his firm and virile

“our men have been wasting time.”
taught her to use would now be merely ridiculous in the eyes of
of the second gun’s crew was “uncle”; Túshin looked at him more
the other sleighs jolted in the same way, and rudely breaking the
confused, which he could not at all account for, had come over him with
before Prince Andrew and flattered him with that subtle flattery which
does this mean? If it were an example taken from the history of China,
officer, that he would drink a bottle of rum sitting on the outer ledge
“On my word, I don’t know what I’ve done with it,” he said.
Napoleon with his suite rode up to the Shevárdino Redoubt where he

And Denísov rode up to a group that had stopped near Rostóv, composed

Pierre remembered Ramballe, and named him and his regiment and the
this heart, so kind and generous? Say ‘perhaps’... The future is so
generals of his acquaintance.
wares, especially a pair of goatskin slippers. “I have hundreds of
saying that Napoleon felt the danger of extending his line, that he
been wished for, and that no one but himself with his Mítenka and
I had to express my own desire...” She had no time to finish. The old
the less are they free.

where a wolf might come out. Having straightened his coat and fastened
with that peculiar lift in the note that indicates that they are after
tache,” he thought. “There now... it’s not a tache... Natásha...
avoided the blow. “Thought... Blackguards...” shouted the prince

pay. And though they pretended to be concerned about the army, each

Pierre on the shoulder. “What a thing to say!” he exclaimed. “Paris?...
guerrillas, Kutúzov was almost sure that the wound was mortal. But he

was it the romantic love stimulated by himself that he experienced for
Andrew with a characteristic desire to foment his own grief decided that

or Napoleon could deprive him of.
not vexed with her and did not reproach her. The reawakened power
Having rolled like a ball in the direction of the impetus given by the
your lump of a son,” a little old man suddenly began attacking Dron—“and
soldiers handed up the charges, turned, loaded, and did their business
Column will march” and so on, the infantry of the belated columns,


no fruit. I never could understand the fondness some people have for
“Oh, my God! My God! Schmidt!” he exclaimed in German. “What a
now. No one will deny that that cause was, on the one hand, its advance
“The dispositions!” exclaimed Kutúzov bitterly. “Who told you
they settled down in the sitting room, “does it ever happen to you to

reports Napoleon gave his orders, which had either been executed before
began. “They’ll be announcing that the gentlemen are in the drawing
She suddenly paused, smiling at her own impetuosity.

his previous resolutions, as a lover forgets in the presence of his
merriment.

feeling it necessary to make a sacrifice before abandoning the capital
An old powdered manservant who was sitting in the antechamber rose
events—the loss of almost the whole of the Rostóvs’ Moscow property—and

the crowd of generals and officers surrounding him. Suddenly his face
am! What is happening to me? How happy I am!” said Pierre to himself.

wife’s command had let his hair grow and abandoned his spectacles,

with the same object in view he came to Moscow. There he wavered between
rather than of what the generals were disputing about.
on condition that she should tell no one.
“Ah! my dear!... Ah! Mary!...” they suddenly exclaimed, and then
a stand there behind a wattle fence in a garden thickly overgrown with
inactive? If the Russian army at Krásnaya Pakhrá had given battle as

Princess Mary looked at her brother in surprise. She did not understand
A personal, human feeling for a brief moment got the better of the
revealed to me. Adonai is the name of the creator of the world. Elohim
it like this. This secret correspondence... How could you let him go so
his voice grew shrill.
sharply, with a slight trembling of the lower jaw, “I can’t prevent
herself have been ashamed of so wild a cry and everyone else would have
village of Rykónty, on the Russian side of the Niemen, by dawn. There he

“How can you ask why?” said Princess Mary. “The thought alone of what
least have some for my sake! She must be shown that the blockhead thinks
advance. The Emperor intended to join the army personally in a few days’

same expression, which seemed to say that he had a right to suppose
obviously in haste to say what he had to.




“Natásha does not know yet, but he is going with us,” said Sónya.
go away without having heard from the staff—and this interested him
the hut till toward evening. Denísov had not yet returned. The weather
His face, despite its fine, rounded wrinkles, had an expression of

music he heard from the left side of the field, and felt and realized
was doing when he was arrested, Pierre replied in a rather tragic manner



very pretty and sweet, and evidently deeply in love with him, but he was
Pierre told her the price.

opposite side stood Dólokhov’s Cossack, counting the prisoners and
of Mack, the news of his defeat, and the thought of what lay before the
Nicholas!” she said, turning to her brother, as if asking him: “What
many of them), and at last he saw how a whole detachment of French
one must dance.” He stepped forward in the direction Pierre indicated.

it is and how dangerous. Too soon or too late... it is terrible!”
“He has made wills enough!” quietly remarked the princess. “But he
For some days the weather had been calm and clear with slight frosts in
it worth thinking or speaking of it at such a moment? At a time of such
remembered it three months before, when the count had sent him to
bright sun, rising slightly to the left behind Pierre, cast upon it
meant for him not only the loss of sixteen hundred rubles, but the
goes up to Auersperg and says: ‘Prince, you are being deceived, here
her hand and a lifted finger at each detail, “and that he had his eyes
him and she wished and tried to please him as much as possible.
the disordered battalion and at the enemy, “what’s that?”
cheerful in her own separate—probably foolish—but bright and happy
army, growing more incoherent and more diffused, mingling with music
conventional things with no definite meaning, especially if
And Platón shifted his seat on the straw.
darkness....”
understand... what a soul he has!”
“And yet he’s such an affectionate father,” said Countess Mary,
reason to capture a king or a duke—it seemed that now—when any battle
“My dear fellow, with our five hundred thousand troops it should be
Nothing is the cause. All this is only the coincidence of conditions in
Consider that on our retreat we have lost by fatigue and left in the

The superintendent of police turned round at that moment with a scared
not understand what was said to them in French.
surprise. Then came the prayer just received from the Synod—a prayer for
grow imperceptibly from the cradle to manhood, did not exist for the

remnant of his former clothing), a pair of soldier’s trousers which by


watched him smilingly, and he rode off by the winding path down the
and the jingle of their weapons and saw their horses, their figures, and
tea. Seats were brought in and so was the tea. The officers gazed with
to give you the love you do not feel, and your prayer would have been
At their yesterday’s halting place, feeling chilly by a dying campfire,


“I’ll tell you what to do,” he continued, as Prince Andrew still did not
under whose banner it is very easy to use words having a still less
as author of the military plan, argued that Bonaparte might easily
would either not understand it at all or would be horrified at such
he unwrapped and offered Pierre some baked potatoes. “We had soup for
“This is Count Rostóv, squadron commander, and I am your humble

described their last days in Moscow, their departure, the fire, and
an Order of St. George at his buttonhole and a plain forage cap set
straight on Napoleon, he was silent.... So insignificant at that moment
questions of health, sometimes in Russian and sometimes in very bad but
one quite at home, and from habit immediately lay down on the sofa, took
“Hey, look at the trace horse!... Get her leg out! She’ll fall.... Ah,
the Emperor, and all the brilliant young people of Petersburg. The
“Brothers! Dear fellows! Darlings!” old soldiers exclaimed, weeping, as
attitude in Moscow and instead of his opponent’s rapier saw a cudgel
Alexander I—the pacifier of Europe, the man who from his early years

reluctance to the duty imposed by his position, raised his head
Pétya shook himself, jumped up, took a ruble from his pocket and gave it
interests,” said Bilíbin.
him fuss and bustle now, my job’s done and I’m lying
recognizes his high vocation and will be true to it. That is the one
something terrible and monstrous rising in his soul and turned quickly
the family—that is, one wife or one husband. Natásha needed a husband. A


at them and hack them to pieces, their proximity now seemed so awful
lawful manner. The sutlers alone venture to trade, and they sell stolen
for the peasants of the district burned their hay rather than let the
eyes kept closing, and in his fancy appeared—now the Emperor, now
an instance of a bluestocking being carried away by affairs of the
were called for and received from the footman by bare girlish arms from
responsibility. But circumstances are sometimes too strong for us,
not been found nor was he on the list of prisoners. What was worst of

French army—and sometimes shook that tree itself. By October, when
The first fifteen years of the nineteenth century in Europe present an
Again the officer turned to Gerásim and asked him to show him the rooms
Supposing that by these words Anna Pávlovna was somewhat lifting the
That is what you have gained by alienating me!” And he walked silently
her and had wounded some of her people. He rushed in and saved her....”

want to make an end of it.”

is very unfortunate!” added Anna Pávlovna.
light. It was evident that the more lifeless he seemed at ordinary
and willingly accepted that role. Now he had been sent by Denísov

generals who, of all the blind tools of history were the most enslaved
yelp, fell with its head on the ground, bleeding from a gash in its
pays when he intends to propose.
undisturbed litter of wolf cubs.
“Sophie,” he began, timidly at first and then more and more
settled themselves in their carriages and drove off.
aspect of that skein, as with a buzzing in his head after dinner or


continually thought of how she ought to behave to him. First she decided
too that day indicated the state of affairs. The price of weapons, of
the youth and inexperience of the sovereign, who had trusted worthless
been in disorder, no better wife for Nicholas than Sónya could have
“Rugáy, Rugáyushka! That’s it, come on!” came a third voice just
riot?

burning. The count donned his dressing gown and went out to look. Sónya
draw toward the table, but not near enough for the candles that had been
sorry the prince is still ailing,” and after a few more commonplace


like cardboard figures. Oh, it was beautiful, Monsieur Pierre! Your
that so agitated society—abolishing court ranks and introducing
Vladímirovich Bezúkhov. If he will not assist his godson—you know
army’s foraging operations, provision trains, and hospitals. When—free
about her native land. When he saw the pretty little Bourienne, Anatole
again raised, and those who had run to look at the cannon ran back

“Eh? Nonsense! He sees well enough,” said Prince Vasíli rapidly, in a

foot in the stirrup. His horse by habit made as if to nip his leg, but
either sat alone or came timidly to Princess Mary, or to Natásha of whom
Túshin told them to give the man some water. Then a cheerful soldier
who was treating her in some new and unusual way.
came to town and wanted to invite me to dinner—I gave him a pretty
received no communication from you, yet on the first of September I
were passing, and a clear black sky appeared. Sometimes it seemed as
with which he spoke to the Emperor, and who considered Kutúzov to be
atmosphere of a large and active town which is always so attractive to a
Cossacks fell. Here as at Tarútino they went after plunder, leaving the
Prince Vasíli rose.

the prince had received the Rostóvs, pretended not to notice how upset

halted for three quarters of an hour.
countenance.
waves of the great movement abate, and on the calm surface eddies are
His grandfather, who was his godfather, trembling and afraid of dropping
afraid of being late for Matins. Hastily washing, and meekly putting on
It was plain that the Russian nest was ruined and destroyed, but in


day. And once more Kutúzov had to consent.

Emperor Alexander did not consider Kurákin’s demand for his passports a
“Oh! Oh! Oh!” he muttered, looking down from the window at the



who had been arrested with Pierre. “All right, you can tell all about it
on his arm as if that touch might soothe or rouse him.
the box for cards.
reality Lavrúshka, having got drunk the day before and left his master
Brotherhood has made application for you to be received into our Order
Kutúzov, with his uniform unbuttoned so that his fat neck bulged over
perhaps dying, while meeting my remorse with some forced bravado!”
“Mon enfant!” she muttered, “je vous aime et vous connais depuis
anyone else had a right to criticize what the Empress desired or was

understood and condemned.
most joyful though erroneous rumors were rife of the imaginary approach
the bridges were strong and had handrails. Everything bore an impress of
dangers. During these wanderings, Pierre noticed that he was spoken
together,” he thought, repeating words of Karatáev’s which he found


and spoke of it as Plutarch speaks of the deeds of the ancients.
her quick intuition.

it without undressing and immediately fell asleep.

adjutant, or really let the matter drop, was the question that worried
you are only half my age—I advise you, as a father would, to cease
war, and like everyone else unconsciously exaggerated their sorrow
were pronounced, Pierre, who had so long been considering his career,
with the villain. We must punish the villain who has caused the ruin of
ridicule. Speránski related how at the Council that morning a deaf
And all Nicholas did was fruitful—probably just because he refused to

Pierre had taken part in tying a policeman to a bear. He had now been
particularly kindly attention. “Yes, I heard,” said he sympathetically,
Sónya was sitting sobbing in the corridor. “Márya Dmítrievna, for God’s
by their own reasoning, repeated the argument he had already put to
CHAPTER VII
vaguely conscious that he might be the cause of the sadness her face
what it was ein Mann zu sein. * Véra at the same time smiling with a
bed to be set up in the glass gallery, another day he remained on the
CHAPTER X
the middle, unfastened, exposing their sunburned collarbones, impressed
“Go away, Princess! Go away... go away!”
confirming the opinion that everything was going from bad to worse, but
“I am so glad, so glad! I was beginning to be vexed with you. I did
how one day soon after his marriage he came out of the bedroom into his



daughter. “How beautiful she is!” Natásha without saying anything
conclusion involves a contradiction, since the series of French
hand the French had occupied Moscow. On the other Kutúzov felt assured
Natásha did not reply and went to her own room to read Princess

of gold. It may indeed make jingling coin, but will do no more than
up to the eleventh of July no manifesto or appeal had been received,

of his life could he understand goodness, beauty, or truth, or the
Bolkónski referred to Anatole as a “pupil”) “for the sake of my
of peoples took place in consequence of such and such geographic,
taken off, onto the farther bank, and reharnessed. The sun had sunk half
gown tied round with a towel, and who evidently enjoyed the respect of

that whole nation to submit. An army gains a victory, and at once the
some time, listening to what was being said, and evidently found nothing
in uniforms he had been accustomed to see from quite a different point
and not in the habit of running, trotted awkwardly stumbling on his
afraid you might think that she does not like you.”

“It’s a bad business,” said the general without answering him,
catacombs came to him and said, ‘Believe in me and I will make you
back seized him by the arm, pulled him through the wicket, and ran back
farther away. Among the soldiers in the shops and passages some men were
clear, insolent eyes in the general’s face.
CHAPTER XV
something happened to induce her to sing, a practice she had quite

“Very well,” said Smolyanínov, and went on at once: “Have you any

reply: “I will tell you what to do, and what I do. Dans le doute, mon
wobbewy!’—‘Wobbewy,’ I say, ‘is not done by man who seizes
seeing some men running toward him. “They will help me!” In front





detailed and exact orders as to measures to be taken immediately
charged with them beside him. Rostóv heard the story and not only said

trowel, a rough stone and a squared stone, a pillar, three windows, and
were staring at their mother with a look of stupefaction on their pale
going on around him or not. One thing was certain—that he was suffering

eyes. “But I’ll go to Bezúkhov’s myself. Pierre has arrived, and
character, but more so recently, since in the new reigns of Paul and
“We are not diplomatic officials, we are soldiers and nothing more,”
have been no life, there would have been nothing.

ground. Natásha blushed happily. “I like him and all his family.

already prepared...”
followed him in, as if there were now no further need for permission to


it was a shell) “either proving fatal at once or being very slight,”
contrary to the restless confusion into which he felt himself being


the lid of the case containing the carpets would not shut down. A few

chorus.”
Regulations and—what he had not at all expected—was chairman of a
handkerchief, that the major ceased smiling and after some reflection—as

know I am good,” she thought, “but yet my best years are slipping by

and a timid smile.


“Ah, you’re up already,” said Denísov, entering the room.
“We ought to go, don’t you think so?” said Nicholas. “Come to me
Some flash as of an electric spark shot from Telyánin’s eyes to

was heartily sick of them. In spite of this, or rather because of
Twelve sharpshooters with muskets stepped out of the ranks with a firm
Sónya jumped out of the coach and ran to the countess. The countess,
down by them.
wounded dragged themselves out of their rooms and stood with pale but
himself, his faith in the right ordering of the universe, in humanity,
“We all have our weaknesses,” said Kutúzov smiling and walking away
Frenchmen, in a variety of uniforms. To the right and left of the post
“As the enemy’s left wing rests on wooded hills and his right
that these thoughts had been suggested to Prince Andrew by his

In military affairs the strength of an army is the product of its mass
pilgrimage, of holy friendship, of the Eternal Architect of the
“Well, good-by!” said Prince Andrew, bending over to Alpátych. “You
And Denísov told the esaul that the dispatch just delivered was a
said? God forgive you!” And she crossed herself. “Lord forgive him!
    CHAPTER VIII
“My vocation is a different one,” thought Princess Mary. “My

“Love? What is love?” he thought.

gray overcoats, wounds, the smoke of gunpowder, the sounds of firing,
“You’re first!” cried Ilyín, flushed.
and well-bred Count Rostóv. Among the men was an Italian prisoner, an
Beside him was Simon Chekmár, his personal attendant, an old horseman
their neighbor.) “I knew you wouldn’t be able to resist it and
you have been entered in the diplomatic corps and made a Gentleman of

his son by both hands, he cried, “Now I’ve got you, so take the
filled by the domestic serfs—the men on one side and the women on
last irresistible wave burst from the rear and reached the front ranks,
soul. And suddenly that father whom she had judged would look for his
blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two
chief’s rival, the man who is undermining him (and there are always
of conflict but reported what they had heard from others; and also
in a most dejected state of mind amid Denísov’s hospital comrades,
kiss me,” and he offered his cheek.
the people’s will, as some historians suppose, then all the details

or an orchestra. She was accustomed always to oppose anything announced

A modern branch of mathematics having achieved the art of dealing with
It naturally seemed to Napoleon that the war was caused by England’s
sleeves with her usual threatening gesture and glancing sternly round,
“I can’t help it,” said the prince. “Lavater would have said I
cahd.”
He had no thought of betraying us, he tried to do the best he could,

“Your joke is too bad, it’s witty but unjust,” said Anna
pointed boot then fashionable, touched the groin of the bobtailed bay
was the matter, he only uttered some incoherent oaths and threats in a
when she was not like that and when everything was light and gay. She
bees. They have almost all died unawares, sitting in the sanctuary they
feeling implanted in each of us and in our fathers.

was too far off, and for a man going a thousand miles it is absolutely
The doctor said this restlessness did not mean anything and was due
trying to prove that the Russians had surrendered and had fled all
needed for the dance, had tears in her eyes, though she laughed as she
not at all worse than others issued in similar circumstances—did not
“Your cousin...” Dólokhov started to say, but Nicholas interrupted
CHAPTER XVIII
desperate effort....
will all die for him gladly! Is it not so, gentlemen? Perhaps I am not
the guns.
farther he left Moscow behind and the deeper he plunged into that sea

mistaken. Yes, at once, that very instant, her fate would be decided.
affairs cheered Sónya.
in the tone of a servant who wants to remain good friends with another
Suvórov’s time, now passing so gallantly before the Emperors, that he



schoolboy, looked round, trying by a smile to win Simon’s sympathy for
else—indefinite but firm as the bond between her own body and soul.
Mary entered the antechamber as usual at the time appointed for the
She hurriedly ascended the narrow dimly lit stone staircase, calling to
to let them have the grain.”
sometimes felt as if he was vanishing and that neither he nor she
ill-disposed toward you. He is an invalid and an old man who must be
she had sacrificed so much. She could not refrain from weeping at these
contradict Willarski and even seemed to agree with him—an apparent
the Russian troops had been broken up, there was no part of the Russian

“When did you get the letter? Was it from Olmütz?” repeated

For the last three days Boguchárovo had lain between the two hostile

“I often think, though, perhaps it’s a sin,” said the princess,
fresh-looking, handsome old man with a large gray mustache.
triumph? How long shall they wield unlawful power?
is a dream,” said Pierre. “Understand, my dear fellow, that outside
His servant handed him a half-cut novel, in the form of letters, by

man ought to have known it for himself.
against it and forcing its way in. Something not human—death—was
thousands such as I in Russia.’

aside with his arm, said in a breathless voice,
and of whom there were very many in the lodge.
on her face and showing no concern for her mistress.
me! What will become of us? I am the wife of the doctor of the Seventh
time, had begun to sound like a sad reminiscence to Natásha’s ears.
“Then hand to the governor in person a letter about the deed.”

in Natásha two days before that she would not only not be hurt if Pierre
most legitimate questions humanity asks itself when it encounters the
to Pierre were qualities) of untidiness and neglect of herself, she now
latter threw up his arms in surprise saying it was nowhere to be found

seemed grotesque and amazing to Natásha. She could not follow the opera
one banner—that of active virtue.’ Prince Sergéy is a fine fellow and
carriage and rode up to Dólokhov.
fresh from the army, an acquaintance of his own, who often danced at
officer of the suite by the arm. “Look! A man has fallen! Fallen,

Prince Andrew could no longer restrain himself and wept tender loving
solution, namely, for Nicholas to marry a rich heiress. She felt this to
“All right, one can’t talk—how tiresome!”
“Semën! Do you know the Daniel Cooper?”
stood still at the window and listened.
farther. Sérpukhov is already occupied by an enemy detachment and Túla
to disperse.

years the whole course of life is altered and presents an intensive
“The Pávlograd hussars?” he inquired.
Natásha and Pierre, left alone, also began to talk as only a husband


inquiring to what set they belonged, here looked down on them.

“Is everything quite all right?”

days before Princess Mary arrived. It was the last spiritual struggle
will. She had not slept and had stolen downstairs on tiptoe, and going
It was a cavalry general who had obtained the Emperor’s special favor
Russian voice.

and distinctly. In the valley he saw before him something like a river,
all. At last the sleigh bore to the right, drew up at an entrance, and
The lad with the turned-up sleeve gave the smith a blow in the face and
the wounded gathered in, the supplies of ammunition replenished, the
head steward’s calculation, about two million rubles.
“Thank you, my dear.” She kissed him on the forehead and sat down
a laugh still more so, he quitted the table.

go!”
“We are not fighting pour le Roi de Prusse, but for right principles.
declaring that only his courage and good luck made such a feat possible:
disorganized, I stopped in the road and thought: ‘I’ll let them
meaning for anyone else, but gave him some of the best joys of his life;
appearing at the open kitchen door with the pistol in his hand. With
who had gathered round him, telling them what he knew and listening to


have said that I should be a soldier and a captain of dragoons in the

For the peoples of the west to be able to make their warlike movement
will. The races, the English Club, sprees with Denísov, and visits to

girl, you and your sisters are not heiresses! If you don’t believe me,
to satisfy all requirements.
kind relation. But, Nataly, you know my love for my son: I would do

mother and the youngest daughter—both named Nataly. Ever since


the stern expression of the adjutant who was also looking that way, he
only now found full satisfaction for it. Moreover, at this moment Pierre
ruler, was Pugachëv a representative of the will of the people? If not,
to control her joy which expressed itself by laughter.
If the Emperor pleases to recognize Bonaparte as Emperor and to conclude
progress. Would you believe it, I have literally not a penny and don’t
up, was hastily writing at a tub turned bottom upwards. Kozlóvski’s
against whom he stumbled, seized his thin neck with his hands and,
pass the three officers quite easily, but Zherkóv, pushing Nesvítski
without exception speak only of the self-sacrifice, patriotic devotion,
marshals. His eye fell on Pierre’s large and striking figure, and in
rage and strength which she knew and had herself experienced after his
the Young Guards stationed behind the knoll moved forward. Napoleon
insisted on Natásha’s going with her to consult the doctors.

his red nose, stepped forward from the crowd as if expecting the Emperor
about the army and the battle, and then the talk went off into merry
acquaintances not only cordially, but even with a shade of deference
country’s sake? And how was he to blame, with his dimple and blue eyes?
Pierre and there were lines of pain on his face and a shamefaced smile.
a mild and attractive personality; and a personal grievance against
“I am not in the cavalry, Colonel, but I am a Russian general and if
And shouting to his horses, he began to pass the first sleigh.
of factory hands, house serfs, and peasants, with whom some officials,
“And you’re surprised at the way she rides, Simon, eh?” said the
healthy body, and all the affection and care of his family. “And why
Rostóv from a distance saw with envy and remorse how von Toll spoke
but instead of the band a choir began singing a cantata composed by Paul

Eh?... What then?... Eh?”
the crowd standing there. The crowd unexpectedly found itself so close
“I’d like to put you on a two days’ march with a knapsack! Your
That was the only doubt often troubling Pierre. He did not now make any

off.
inhabitants, robbing them or stealing to provision the army, and fraud
“That would be fine, gentlemen!”


some by official duties, some by self-interest—house owners, clergy,
“He was not always old. But this is what I’ll do, Natásha, I’ll
of freedom not only would he be unable to understand life, but he would
the same yard as themselves and in a part of the hut across the passage;

and showed him all sorts of favors.)
on the part of the Russians, it had to perish, bleeding from the mortal
recognized several acquaintances among these notables, but did not
“What have the young people come to nowadays, eh, Feoktíst?” said
in a crowd, Natásha in her lilac silk dress trimmed with black lace
gray everyday dress. Now please, do it for my sake. Katie,” she said
is the only thing left me—not singing!” his thoughts ran on. “Go

express a contrary opinion. Speránski smiled and, with an evident wish
    CHAPTER XXVI
hearing him, became still surlier and ruder.

“Don’t, Natásha! What nonsense!” she said, hoping it was a joke.
voice. “Here is our commanding officer... ask him,” and he pointed to a
Weimar relations out of Germany.... Yes. I’ll drive them out. Let him

himself, and this fresh opportunity for action gave him new energy
diplomatist fresh from Berlin with the very latest details of the
While Kutúzov was talking to Raévski and dictating the order of the day,
wife: “Ah, why have you done this to me?”
continually obliged to reply to innumerable questions addressed to him,
“Tell him to come later. He’ll be coming out directly, we must
propose.
Russia, and arrived too late to take part in the first actions of the
triumph.
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.
Prince Andrew; he seemed a man from another world, and for a long time

different men surrounded Pierre. He looked at them without understanding
to his sister, “he could go out in his smock, but as it is cold he

replied, and the four simply looked at one another. She lingered in the
cry. “I need five hundred rubles, and have only one twenty-five-ruble
in her vexation, “if you won’t obey the doctor and take your medicine at
seen before—human eyes fixed upon her—and turning her head a little
hostess. Looking at her she may have recalled the golden, irrecoverable
infamous, vile woman!”
“Well, the Lord be thanked, Princess,” said Mary Bogdánovna, not
“Mamma,” screamed Natásha, “I’ll stake my head it’s he! I assure you!
disappear and a single question, that of the closed door, superseded
prisoners, and Junot’s baggage train—still constituted a separate and

“Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the country. He is
courtiers accompanying the army were living in the best houses of the
else the Tsar did.
or money, and they go over to that camp. No independent men, such as you
to clear out that the prince could hardly stop them. He decided that he
he realized that people might not be aware of his happiness, he pitied
man was more to her than Nastásya Ivánovna, the buffoon. Something stood

common impulse which bound the whole crowd of French into one mass and
what will follow.

approval, he merely studied her with interest. Formerly she had felt
exchanging a few words. From a campfire a hundred paces off came a sound
that she could not see anything, and again settled down in her former
French, you fool.’ And what do you think? ‘No,’ said he, ‘I have not
and at the people in it. Round a long table covered with black sat some
“Well, that’s right. As soon as the countess wakes we’ll be off, God
interpreted. The life of old Prince Bolkónski, Prince Andrew, and
brave, kind friends,” and he leaned his head against the shoulder of one

evidently glad of a chance to say quicker in words what he wanted to
As he fell asleep he had still been thinking of the subject that now
absence. He, as I wrote you before, has changed very much of late. After
enjoyment from that reading.
addressing Princess Mary for the first time, “to forget yourself again
After dinner Natásha, at Prince Andrew’s request, went to the


he disarmed his hearers.
was engaged in conversation with a general and did not answer her

attendance on him, to the enemy camp. Wintzingerode was not merely
in Dresden, the diplomatic negotiations which, in the opinion of
Within half an hour adjutants had been sent in various directions with
and the chief of the hospitals asks where the wounded are to go, and a
wheels and working the screws himself.
been reprimanded on account of the blue greatcoat.
screen before the choir on the left side, and a feeling, new to her, of

in gaining the reputation “d’ une femme charmante, aussi spirituelle
movement of peoples from east to west, and for this fresh war another
Telyánin.
head of his regiment without charging anything for the show.


happiness—floated continually in her imagination like temptations of the

frightened lest she should be in the way and tried to find excuses for
Before Rostóv had had time to consider and determine the distance of
the twenty-sixth the battle of Borodinó itself took place.

latest war news, and when the ten minutes required by propriety had
was standing beside the princess, and they were both speaking in excited

and that he, from above, saw her affection and gratitude. The princess
whole house, there was a feeling of awe at something important that was
settle with all the villains, you’ll see! And you said the French...
turned sharply to the left, and Pierre, losing sight of him, galloped
sallow-faced, short, stout woman, the Empress Mother, with her smile
who remained behind decided for themselves what they must do.
depends on the way unexpected movements of the enemy—that cannot be
composure, waiting for a display of the eccentricities his father had
affirmatively.) “When you hear a knock at the door, you will uncover
Just as prolonged and stubborn is the struggle now proceeding between
could not marry—he is married!”
at her own vileness, simply asked God to forgive her everything,
present. What had happened was that news (which afterwards proved to be
work, chimes to play, figures to pop out, and the hands to advance with
“If you noticed some disorder in the garden,” said Alpátych, “it was
and consequently he was made the buffoon of all the Cossacks and hussars
of having been dutiful et tout ce qui s’ensuit!* That’s certain.”
Pelagéya stopped doubtfully, but in Pierre’s face there was such a

French go to Mexico. The King of Prussia and Bismarck issue decrees and
the first and last time in her life.
certain words, seems to us senseless. He had the power and so what he
Adieu, Prince! May God support you...”
simple fellow.”
guerrilla band, less than a mile from the road, sitting on a wagon

unlike the old one, he expected everything to be unusual, even more

pockmarked peasant woman. “Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy!” he added

to pass the time.”
words: “Gallop off to Kórchevo and carry out instructions!”
falling snow and toward evening it began to clear. Through the falling
out until, at the first pause, the guests rise with a rustle of dresses
can’t be! Only to get past them quicker, quicker!”


her in Smolénsk province. His having encountered her in such exceptional
happened because they all want to show how well they can fight. But
to do with this man?” he added, addressing himself to Pierre as to a
been holding it up by the linen bands attached to it were relieved by
ceremonious welcomes (which he knew Pierre would not like), but for just
her hand for the last time. “Don’t go!” she said in a tone
Russian general. The general shouted a demand that the cavalry should be
something as she whispered:
That impulse was reasonable. The condition of fugitives and of pursuers
speaker.

The calèche in which Prince Andrew was being taken attracted Sónya’s
as instinctively as dogs worry a stray mad dog to death. Denís Davýdov,
which stood on her right. It reflected a weak, ungraceful figure and
was able to buy a small estate adjoining Bald Hills and was negotiating

sake let me in to her!” she pleaded, but Márya Dmítrievna unlocked
was a second staircase leading to the back entrance. He went down that
happiness in order to be happy, and now I do believe in it. Let the dead

Natásha, who had borne the first period of separation from her
escort, as if afraid, in the grievous condition they themselves were in,
civilization, and culture. Postulating some generalization as the goal
and for a long time he paced up and down the room, reflecting on his
laws. That is why it is a sin for men like you, Prince, not to serve in
    Aliment de poison d’une âme trop sensible,
for war cannot be conducted successfully without unity of command, and
staff officer, and at Zherkóv, and he frowned.
to men who do not admit that Russia was formed by the will of one man,
slaughtered.
fear, and the thought that he might be killed or badly wounded never

soon as he came across a former acquaintance or anyone from the
“Why not?” asked Natásha in a frightened tone.
the light of men. And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness

you’re not ashamed to bury such pearls in the country?”
Princess, I hold to the principle that a maiden has a full right to
city, while walking through the streets with his wife, some Italians



the Tarútino, the Vyázma, nor the Krásnoe battles were necessary; that
mother!...”

face, and by his walk and the first words he uttered recognized him as a
After he had returned, voices were heard outside the shed. “Who’s that?”
“I hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass run

Registrar’s Department, “that he should remain to guard his documents.
These questions, then as now, existed only for those who see nothing in
Besides this, historians of that kind contradict each other even


The countess, with a coldness her son had never seen in her before,


seem to him that everyone is afraid of him, and that must please him.
word “waiting.”) “Not all the columns have formed up yet, Your
churches, and she seemed to be living her usual life, her cupolas
vulgarity of the expressions that were natural to her, though she had
did not use the familiar thou, but said you to her, and kissed only her
off!” he shouted. “Whether we meet again or not...” and turning away
village in the vicinity of the camp, the immense number of generals and
stretched over boards. In the center of the stage sat some girls in red
she thought very plain, affected, and dry. Natásha suddenly shrank
from carousals back to gossip, reading, and wine. Drinking became more
All this time Natásha sat silent, glancing up at him from under her
only his momentary action in the present, unevoked by any cause—we were
could hear the footstep of someone in thick felt boots, and a voice that
soldier with the harsh voice, and it was that affair and this soldier
their eyes. A lady entering the next box shot a glance of feminine envy
Borís was thus the first to learn the news that the French army had
an argument which was embarrassing for his companion. “If you will
They were fond of asking one another that question.

costumes, went into the drawing room. The count sat in the ballroom,

brotherly love, wagged their heads in token of their mutual affection,
replaced by a naïve and silent feeling of admiration. Napoleon, after
determination, looking at his watch. “It will be too late. It is quite
him he would give them an answer that they would not easily forget.
he arrived. The passionate tenderness with which his mother received him
From an unfinished house on the Varvárka, the ground floor of which was
honor and mark of favor at the French court.

up before him, who all presented arms with their eyes fixed on their
Chigírin talks. Pierre pondered over these broadsheets. Evidently the


looked with a scarcely perceptible and seemingly ironic smile at what
“‘From all my riding,’ he writes to the Emperor, ‘I have got a

her already,” he said, evidently trying to entertain a visitor with
sentinel within her and forbade her every joy. Besides, she had lost all
concerning... you know. Well my dear child, you know how your father’s
service, related to people in the service. It seemed that in this

After giving several recitations, Mademoiselle George left, and Countess
intended to change the existing order of government in Russia: legal,
addressed to him. Alpátych moved forward and next time the official came
a special gratuity for his faithful services, well knowing that at that
establishments for young ladies. Prince Vasíli entered the room with the
“Real gentlemen!” he considered them.

There had been many discussions and preparations for this ball in the

played. Natásha, smoothing her gown, went in with Sónya and sat down,
difference in their ages, but she felt herself to blame toward him and
had had to retreat and had made their withdrawal in perfect order. The

defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer
taken, and all this for the beaux yeux * of His Sardinian Majesty. And

with a white handkerchief tied to his sword and announced that
the door.
sounded still more firm and resolute.
At that very time Prince Andrew was sitting with Pierre and telling him
afraid of a general battle. His hour has come! Mark my words!”
prisoners were. This officer, probably someone on the staff, was holding
was sitting at the head of the table. On either side of her sat the
of Princess Mary he experienced a feeling of shyness and even of fear,

At that moment, on the road leading from the big house, two women and a
with his Russian instinct, was the first to recognize the value of
toward those Pratzen Heights which were being more and more denuded by
“Do stop joking, Bilíbin,” cried Bolkónski.

walk to meet him. His face with its long mustache was serious as always,
usefulness did not depend on making the patient swallow substances for
and especially since he had joined the active army and taken part in
When they were out of the village they began talking again as loud as

good-humored amiable smiles.
influence of wine he said to himself: “It doesn’t matter. I’ll
breast.”
dozen members, of whom half were as well able to pay as himself, Pierre
of military bluntness and geniality with which he always addressed the
He suddenly blushed crimson, and it was plain that he had made a great

away and perished at the same rate from Moscow to Vyázma, from Vyázma
The Tsar said something more which Rostóv did not hear, and the
eagerly the more those past interests were closed to him. It was as if
it was impossible to say when they began, he endured his position
there in which he had now no part could perturb him. He shut his eyes,
“So that’s what she is like; what a fool I have been!” he thought
     * “Ah, it’s you! Do you want something to eat? Don’t be
nothing when they have no powers; this one had none.... The Austrians
have proceeded. When Newton enunciated the law of gravity he did not say

presented he was as little able as his father to change his opinion. He
they have combined.
To us, their descendants, who are not historians and are not carried
to turn the count’s heavy body toward the wall.


from home, at dinners, parties, and balls.

division of continuous motion into discontinuous elements. There is a
intensified her misery.
direction he himself prefers, regards those as leaders who, owing to the
asked the son.
false) had been received during the night of a movement by the French to
Natásha ran with light footsteps to the anteroom.
“Look out!” came a frightened cry from a soldier and, like a bird
the contempt with which Rostóv, from his fighting army point of view,
that His Highness was in the ballroom and wished to see her.
“Where is he?”
and a cocked hat standing apart from his suite in front of his tent on

“Take a glass of boiled water and put a pinch of cream of tartar,”
trivial but even amusing. What concern was it of his that somewhere or
The three voices, hers, Mademoiselle Bourienne’s, and Katie’s, who



almost dragging him to the window. “That money is Denísov’s; you
On reaching the village he dismounted and went to the nearest house,
evoked the compassion of those who knew and liked him.


Anatole turned to the Englishman and taking him by one of the buttons
from the crumpled heap under the table would save him, now counted the

She praised the Rostóvs’ toilets. They praised her taste and toilet,
The officer rode out beyond our lines to Échkino. While still at a

Though what she said was quite just, perhaps for that very reason no one
shoot them) was not merely incomprehensible but revolting. And the
the Minister of War.”
own surprise. “If you gave me Petersburg and Moscow I could not accept
    CHAPTER XV
before, somehow it had always happened that we did not meet. And as long

Chichagóv, one of the most zealous “cutters-off” and “breakers-up,” who


Bonaparte smiled. “The young Cossack made his mighty interlocutor
every corner of the Empire, receiving complaints, redressing wrongs,
in what lay before him, and was tortured—as those are who obstinately
others. He was instinctively and thoroughly convinced that it was
isn’t it logical?
Natásha lay on the bed and in the semidarkness of the room scanned

triumphantly and gaily.

he thought, “they are capital people, who of course have not the
had seized the loaded pistol which they had not had time to recover from
into a shed boarded up with planks!” He smiled, and went and lay down to

occupy all the houses one after another. Pierre, who knew German,
for wine.
And the soldier, pushing away a little dog that was jumping up at
She rushed to Sónya, hugged her, and began to cry.
Having ordered punch and summoned de Beausset, he began to talk to him
worse, would have thought that Rostóv was himself to blame since what


moments of antagonism. Occasionally, and it was always just after they

and to learn that he had to capture a “tongue”—that is, a man from
prove that I remember the family’s goodness to me and that I love
Dólokhov stood frowning and did not speak. Pierre jumped upon the
CHAPTER X
by the arm and put him in the corner. Having put him in the corner
troops, he saw, near a kitchen garden with a ditch round it, two men


was about twenty-five. Like all infantry officers he wore no mustache,
The little princess got up, rang for the maid, and hurriedly and merrily


capture him alive. Count Orlóv-Denísov consulted his fellow officers.
The corporal came, according to orders, to shut the door. The prisoners
bee helps in this work, and may say that in this lies the purpose of the
in this way, but posterity and history have acclaimed Napoleon as grand,
“Oh, yes... I’ll lie down at once,” said Natásha, and began hurriedly
Duke Constantine Pávlovich, who commanded the Guards. The Rostóvs
This was said by the undersized Napoleon, looking up straight into
Lelorgne d’Ideville smilingly interpreted this speech to Napoleon thus:
was already perfectly cured of his former faults and was ready for all
given, to clear himself of the crime of abandoning Moscow. But this
“Well, he’s a poor sort of soldier....”
to transfer him to the Western Army. Kutúzov, who was already weary of
between them if Pierre followed a line of logical reasoning. When he
on him by the doctors, clergy, and relatives of the family. Prince
But not to speak of the fact that nothing prevented him from advancing
and hardly able to restrain his jerky movements, and from the way he
had not known it I should not have addressed you. Your view of life is a
“No, on the contrary, on the contrary! His face was cheerful, and he
for anything and I never will again, nor have I ever reminded you of my
could not think of it without tears, and did not know which had behaved
Frenchwoman at a distance. Prince Andrew’s second letter, written near
of Rousseau’s view, with which he quite agreed, that to have a wet


went away, taking what they could and abandoning their houses and half
the arrival of a suitor agitated her, and still more so by both


Emperor placed on Moscow and especially on its illustrious nobility,
anything, looked fixedly at him.

on the little princess’ face, an expression of childish fear of

you ought to take part in it! It will be great fun. We shall all meet at
The first door on the left led into the princesses’ apartments. The
Emperor, angrily twitching his brows and raising his hoarse voice, and



room, looked at Princess Mary in bewildered surprise. Herself a
then, and “Uncle’s” red borzoi, straining and curving its back,
Prince Vasíli smiled.
to the French and had been given a special name. They called it limonade


What struck him was that Denísov did not seem glad to see him, and

and figures, but they all seemed to him equally meaningless.
The French colonel with difficulty repressed a yawn, but was polite and
otherwise. To tell them that she felt ashamed for herself and for them
“Then it is certain?” said the prince.
    * “Busy already?”
Emperor, and lastly and chiefly Pfuel was there because he had drawn up
not dare dine at the Club as a pastime, did not dare spend money on a

“Well, I have got all I need into packs for two horses,” said
After that Princess Mary did not see her father for a whole week. He was

The Emperor without waiting for an answer turned away and said to one of
    CHAPTER VIII
he also told what he had at first concealed—his own position and even
compressed, and producing by the rapid vibration of their wings an
sixteen.
out the stinging and tormenting thoughts that confused his mind. “This
with Natásha, piquet with his father, and even his comfortable bed



said she, repeating words Pierre had once uttered.

surprise, and noticing the glance he turned on Natásha as he rose.
Rostóv’s share in Dólokhov’s duel with Bezúkhov was hushed up by
grew their antipathy to one another.
This redoubt consisted of a knoll, on three sides of which trenches had
any way behind them, Pierre went to the Three Hills gate. But when he
And Natásha, embracing her, began kissing her face and hands, making



no fresh war could improve the position or add to the glory of Russia,


meaning for him, that he paid no attention to it. The aunt was just
“To the crossing!” said the general coldly and sternly in reply to one
On receiving command of the armies Kutúzov remembered Prince Andrew and
serve her and be a splendid minister; but as soon as she is in danger
where there was no hope of soon taking part in a battle and had come to
Smolénsk, 1812.)
why he stepped out from the window to the veranda and smiled under his
“Ah, my friend!” said he, taking Pierre by the elbow; and there was
got out, in their soaked and streaming clothes, they shouted “Vivat!”
officer reported that no order to advance had been received.
silent and seemed confused. The prince asked her about her father, and
“But what are ‘God’s folk’?” asked Pierre.
eye he had lost, Kutúzov walked with plunging, swaying gait into
they all were, or seemed to be, pretty—so rapturous were their smiles
“Perhaps we’d really better not wake him,” he said hesitating.
“O Lord our God, in whom we believe and in whom we put our trust, let us


And the two friends told each other of their doings, the one of his
“He left long ago. She has been at death’s door.”
daughter’s face which was wincing with pain and gazed long at it.
ostentatiously approached the officer, swinging his arms.
of this common attraction to Smolénsk, their goal, drew each of them in
settled. In that circle the Moscow enthusiasm—news of which had reached

that held by jurisprudence, it follows that jurisprudence can tell
at her devotion and trustfulness, and an oppressive yet joyful sense of
Having thanked Anna Pávlovna for her charming soiree, the guests began
Denísov sat gloomily biting his mustache and listening to the
Natásha kissed her on the hair.


in couples and he himself rode along the line trying to master the
end of the shed was saying, with a strong emphasis on the word who.
“If you won’t answer, I’ll tell you...” Hélène went on. “You
an intimacy with a young foreign prince. When she returned to Petersburg
prayed that the daily interview might pass off well.
“He is a Russian spy,” Davout interrupted, addressing another general

Before two o’clock in the afternoon the Rostóvs’ four carriages, packed
sounds made his spirits rise, but at the same time he was afraid that

“Have they surrendered my ancient capital without a battle?” asked the

and amused as he was when he put on the little icon. “Did he believe?

dress, have it fetched. Really! You know the fate of your whole life may
He was silent awhile.

“Really?” he asked.
“Has anything happened?” she asked. “I am so terrified.”
Francis wants to offer him his daughter in an illegal marriage. The
among others awaiting him in his reception room there was a Frenchman
affected their mutual relations but does not account for the submission

and often a corps commander, or even the commander in chief, did not
the large drawing room. Prince Vasíli came up to Pierre with languid


“Anna Ignátyevna Malvíntseva. She has heard from her niece how you


The beekeeper opens the upper part of the hive and examines the super.

of chance or genius.
seized a biscuit, and as if fearing to be too late, again shouted

off for a year: go abroad, take a cure, look out as you wanted to for
tools laid ready to hand and shavings scattered around—all indicated

“Please keep it. I have several like it,” said Pétya, blushing.

had ridden up to him in a violent passion, shouting: “Arnauts!”
world in which she had been living of late, and she felt not merely
“The wife!” said the old prince, briefly and significantly.
a moment. His love for Natásha, Antichrist, Napoleon, the invasion, the
present bivouac another fortnight there will not be a healthy man left
peuples d’Alexandre, Moscou avec ses innombrables églises en forme de

have been no war; but had all his sergeants objected to serving a second

resting; curiosity as to what the French army, so long lost sight of,
The hussar only sighed without replying and coughed angrily. The sound


had cried “Vive l’Empereur!” at the sight of the portrait of the boy
    As ‘twas growing dark last night
be able to solve so delicate a question, and then I have noticed that
“What is it? What’s the matter?”

“What a treasure that Dmítri is,” added the count with a smile when
yourself but only wanted a quiet life, the harsher your steward was the
there is no Petersburg for me, and that that must be settled first of

“Mary, you mustn’t think me wicked. No? Mary darling, how I love you!
of going to the back entrance where his carriage awaited him, went
than any words could have done—did he betray to himself, to her, and to
His very first, remotest recollections of childhood came back to Prince
only because I still hope to meet such a divine creature, who will

out of the Governor’s room. Involuntarily listening now to the firing,



“The King of Rome!” he said, pointing to the portrait with a graceful
main army was on the other side of Moscow or beyond it.
exhausted by feeding her baby, who steals some food; or a man trained
council was assembled.
    * “On vous fera danser.”
“I must also inform you,” said the Rhetor, “that our Order
we ourselves should not have done so, just as people speak today. But

in their statement as to the force on which the authority of some
Two girlish voices sang a musical passage—the end of some song.
But when Volkónski said, with a frown, that it was in the Emperor’s name
Nicholas put down the book and looked at his wife. The radiant eyes
facts and the historical accounts only arises because the historians
was relating an anecdote, and Speránski was laughing in advance at
had entered. The most solemn mystery in the world continued its course.
a gentleman in disguise, and who was passing under the arch of the
protégé, but Prince Dolgorúkov politely and firmly pressing his hand
But if you want to ride round the position, come along with us. We are
deduced the essentials of his wishes quite correctly, and having once
The countess was upset by her friend’s sorrow and humiliating poverty,



chair, he drew up with a click of his spurs and bowed to her, Natásha
Natásha.
“He? He’s crazy... he did not want to listen. But what’s the use

is nothing to mend! The principles laid down by me must be strictly
And a joyful yet pathetic expression which seemed to beg forgiveness for
began singing her solfeggio. When she had finished her first exercise
and began to lay them out for a game of patience.
“What does this mean?” she brought out.
looks so much older! It cannot be she. It merely reminds me of her.”
“There, my dear princess, I’ve brought you my songstress,” said
she moved toward Anna Pávlovna. Hélène was so lovely that not only
the middle of a field without rhyme or reason. It’s all those damned
with that.
that is, of any science whatever. If there is even a single body
riding from the village on a handsome sleek gray horse, accompanied
because her nose had to be cleared, and so on. What for people in their
“Come, come!” she said, not letting go of his arm. And they went to
     monarchical institutions.

near sixty, dear friend... I too... All will end in death, all! Death is
needed to exercise her tongue and lungs. She cried as a child does,
remaining alone in the little room, he walked up and down for a long

“I know myself that one cannot help one’s sympathies and

encounter and to preserve his troops, the massacre of the broken mob
“Lise, I beg you to desist,” said Prince Andrew still more
lifted her beautiful head and, half turning to him, said firmly: “That’s
Oh, that wicked Prince Hippolyte!” she said.
After supper Pierre with his partner followed the others into the

was accustomed to understand him. He led him to the desk, raised the

conditions of life to which its people were accustomed to submit would
if considering in how far the thing was possible—replied in the
he must have returned home. The officer searched till six o’clock in the
against his right, flew round again in a circle. Natásha guessed what
movement when a rational and sacred aim for the Crusade—the deliverance
prince interrupted her.
at the rate of twenty-seven miles a day that they could not go any
express the thoughts that filled his mind. He began to explain that he
both voices began speaking at the same time, the door was flung open,
(a guard of honor) was standing, and they saw Kutúzov coming down the
turning away from the girls, who at once assumed an air of inattention.

“A geography lesson!” he muttered as if to himself, but loud enough
“I have not been to see you all this time because I have been at my
your doing so; but I warn you that if you dare to play the fool in my

seen at the gate was sitting on a green garden seat, plaiting a bast


“Do you know, one Christmas I drove from Tver,” said Anatole,
Rostóv went off to his squadron without waiting for tea. Day was

considerations. Similarly profound considerations are given for
a wish to see her often, but yet always became ill-humored when she

contemporaries, were more clearly and strongly noticeable than among
last summer, is so noble-minded and full of that real youthfulness which
and how happy I may be with such a friend and such a husband! Husband?
serving modestly in an obscure regiment, spending comparatively little,
campfire blazed brighter than others. For leave to sit by their wattle
shops, to government offices, to the post office, and to the Governor’s.

every time a ball flew past. Rostóv on the left flank, mounted on his
there was a crush. Halfway across stood Prince Nesvítski, who had
said to destroy him and retain their power.
an object of observation, is subject to certain laws, and man submits to
Beside him in a stooping position sat a small man of whose presence he

squatted down on his heels by the fire beside the officer with the long
with an observation unusual to him, and everything confirmed his
in clean notes, was lying ready under a handkerchief on the countess’
This short man had on a white leather apron which covered his chest and
heard.
and, pressing Pierre’s hand, he went out.
of old acquaintances and at the same time, unaware of it himself and
The book was the Gospel, and the white thing with the lamp inside was a

and about Natásha and Prince Andrew; and again everything seemed to him




“Is it true that Austrians have been beaten?” asked Dólokhov.
important old lady dismissed Nicholas after repeating her invitation to
he. “We want to give the Senate new juridical powers, but we have no
do it. He did not know why, but he felt a foreboding that he would not
seeing her guilty expression, put his other arm around her and kissed
forty miles all the peasants were moving away and leaving their villages
against a father’s will. One wants to do it peacefully and lovingly.
“Sergéy Kuzmích—From all sides—” he said, unbuttoning the top
now all is changed,” she thought as she sat with the letter she had
comrades, talking of women, began chaffing Rostóv, saying that he was
habit, glanced now at Kutúzov and now at the door with a look of
CHAPTER XV
Understanding at once to whom she alluded, Prince Vasíli said in a
life, his absent-mindedness and simplicity—here among these people gave

of disease without help while material assistance could so easily be

Posting Date: January 10, 2009 [EBook #2600]
who stood in the midst of the group, without a coat, and with his fine
between life and death. When during those first days he remembered that
“And so, brother” (it was at this point that Pierre came up), “ten years



now at the cart by which he was standing, in which two wounded men

said Pierre. “I should like to start from the Moskvá River and ride
on Pierre the usual animating effects of a conflagration. It had a


an attack. But when they had marched for about an hour in the dense fog,

The French, retreating in 1812—though according to tactics they should

the Emperor would most likely be satisfied immediately, as the Emperor’s

tea and their voices were audible from the next room. At tea all sat
knew he was in these men’s power, that only by force had they brought
attentively and fixedly at these prisoners, who presented a specially
those Kurágins and leading that sort of life. It suits you so
Mary’s questions and hardly refrained from sobbing as he looked at her.
being stronger than the enemy at a given moment. That’s all.”

The sole importance of the crossing of the Berëzina lies in the fact
wounded were more distinctly heard than any other sound in the darkness

At this moment that terrible door, which Pierre had watched so long

princess, a certain confusion and dissension had arisen among the crowd.
convent. This was Prince Shcherbátov’s house, where Pierre had often

No one replied a word to Dólokhov’s laughter, and a French officer whom
was not in love with anyone in particular, but with everyone. Whatever

a threatening gesture. “If the purse isn’t found I’ll flog you,
“Do you know what it’s about?” Pétya asked Natásha.
tears.”
Princess Mary. “No one except these despised God’s folk who, wallet
whiteness and softness Prince Andrew had only seen on the faces of
leave the army.



virtue,” he read, “we must cleanse men from prejudice, diffuse
Below, where the fight was beginning, there was still thick fog; on the

advantageous background to his elegant and tactful wife. Pierre during
the wax with the baby’s hair had not sunk in the font but had floated.
and lifted it to his lips, threw back his head, and raised his free hand
Looking at her own handsome face she seemed to become still colder and
And that is how power is understood by the science of jurisprudence,
“What is it?” asked the person in the other room.
amid every occupation, was now replaced, not by another question or by a


Speránski. Prince Andrew recognized him at once, and felt a throb

husband was given her and he gave her a family. And she not only saw no
his conclusion was weaker than what had gone before, he added quickly:
is doing is very important (otherwise he will not have sufficient
is it that millions of men commit collective crimes—make war, commit
was already ending. “If only they would let me end my days as I want
Bennigsen, who had chosen the position, warmly displayed his Russian
“Mine, sir? All right. But how about you?”
you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
    CHAPTER I
proposal, the holiday tone of joyousness usual at such times took



plates of raisins, walnuts, and almonds. The governesses were discussing
The Council of War began to assemble at two in the afternoon in the
which he himself did not understand.
CHAPTER XI
had no idea and could not imagine what state he was in, all I wanted was
to settle here altogether next year....”
before her as you dared to do yesterday, I will show you who is master
“May I join you?” said Dimmler who had come up quietly, and he sat
“When you are here he can’t tear himself away,” she said.
     Krásnoe, by Bogdánovich.
hats. Princess Mary lowered her eyes and, tripping over her skirt, came


it was the attack in which he was said to have thrown some St. George’s

campaigns, periods of war) into such equations, a series of numbers

looking at her and waiting. Nicholas saw that Denísov was refusing
at him. After his first visit Borís said to himself that Natásha
sounds of falling drops and the munching of the horses near by, could be
As she said this the countess looked round at her daughter. Natásha
a frown on his brow), “to consult with him to act, and to aid the army
that he too seemed ashamed of the hussar of the line.
surprise and even alarm as they went past him. The senior artillery


        30 guns of Campan’s division

“And how does he now regard the matter?” asked Pierre, referring to

movement, reached Murat’s position apparently in order to give
events. The incontestable proof of this deduction is that, however many
the courtiers addressed him and the way Paulucci had allowed himself to
him, went on reading his paper.
and “ladykins” as he called the cocottes. More than once in their
into action as arranged, and after going behind other columns for
He did not know what to say.
“And how like one another,” said Ilyín.
But never had she felt so grieved for him or so much afraid of losing
spoke of his love, but that it was the very thing she wished for.
Natásha’s room.
innocent and untried?”
The crowd remained silent and only pressed closer and closer to

domination based on the application or threat of physical force, like

relations sprang up between them. It was as if they had not known each
“How she blushes, how she blushes, my pretty!” said Hélène. “You
akin to them did he begin boldly to manage his serfs, that is, to
home, warm and dirty as in an old dressing gown.
lady. Having finished speaking to her, the Emperor looked inquiringly
“O Lord!”
joy to give my Franz a thaler, or let him go with his Liebchen to the

accept them as gold, or among those who do not know the nature of

for some weeks near a totally ruined and deserted German village.
reproach, as she stood before her pilgrims like a hen before her
disguising their voices, bowed to their hostess and arranged themselves
to choosing her words was that she really had no time to spare for these
Russians thought they would beat Bonaparte or not, Lavrúshka screwed up
twenty years in vain. He was a model steward, possessing in the highest
drums, he recognized that mysterious, callous force which compelled
copies of which the countess corrected her mistakes in spelling.
was telling a fourth group that he was prepared to die with the city
formation, now in the equipment employed, now, and most usually, in the
a battlefield to whom thousands of new and brilliant ideas occur which
suffering, and the nearness of death aroused in him. Looking into
Davout brightened up at the news the adjutant brought, and began
me,” thought Natásha—“is it possible that I am now to be the
to do so, and Borís, even had he wished to, could not have done so on
heard that the regiments were to be made up to their full strength, that
Russians at Borodinó. The French invaders, like an infuriated animal
harmonious whole? Don’t I feel that I form one link, one step, between
one’s occupation, that is, of one’s way of life, now seemed to Pierre to
abroad to be initiated into the higher secrets of the order.
about him and about his love for him, letting it be understood that he
as comprehensible as that they were made from a handful of earth at a
merrily and prettily as ever.
said Bilíbin as he came out to meet Prince Andrew. “Franz, put the
was unescorted, Denísov with his hussars had seized it by force. The
The ancient historians all employed one and the same method to describe
After those involuntary words—that if he were free he would have asked
the thought of what might await her there—not after many days, but that


a year in cash, besides running up debts for as much more, which his
that anything was hidden from her, but because she had dropped so
of men, Kutúzov—having taken into consideration the Cossack’s report, a
The countess had been prepared by Anna Mikháylovna’s hints at dinner.
historian Thiers, like other of his historians, trying to justify his
the doctor. Perhaps he’ll take pity on me someday, when it comes to
more things might have been taken out, but Natásha insisted on having



mustache. “I want to know what you men are like. Are you the same as
beside a long row of unharnessed French guns. At the approach of the
Just as in a dream when all is uncertain, unreasoning, and

that day now seemed to him quite clear and completely solved. He now
CHAPTER IV
“Why is it others see things and I don’t?” she said. “You sit
the glory of our arms and of the day’s work, they assumed a serious
Agitated and flushed she paced the room, sending now for Michael
holding his baby son, who was again awake, on his huge right palm and
and logical turn of mind inspired him with respect all the more because
All the domestic circle, tutors, governesses, and guests, were already

Natásha had not had a moment free since early morning and had not once
replied de Beausset.
“How have you got here?” he said, and galloped on.


Prince Andrew riding up to the officer.

Murat was there, and they all gazed eagerly at this little group of


conviction and tried to behave morosely with Rostóv. But the
the new church he had built, and then receive visitors who would come to
carried the sick man dispersed. Anna Mikháylovna touched Pierre’s


mounted Frenchmen, probably adjutants, were galloping up the hill. A
let him do what he vill, but I cannot sacrifice my hussars... Bugler,
parade. However, I will let you know.”
staff could be heard conversing in French, and Kutúzov’s gray head in
The strains of the polonaise, which had continued for a considerable

Anatole, having taken off his overcoat, sat with arms akimbo before a

daughter of Prince Vasíli, but visualized her whole body only veiled
and with the household. With the stern old prince and the gentle, timid
the boy in his charge, then he ought to retire from the service and go
Rostóvs’ house was littered with wisps of hay and with dung from the
quitrent, Alpátych thought no difficulty would be made about complying
commander. Rostóv charged the French because he could not restrain

punishments were to be admonitory and not corporal, and hospitals,
reading them aloud. Bagratión bowed his head and listened:
jesting remarks he rose, taking Pierre by the arm, and drew him aside.
what is happening to us—but it is very strange and pleasant whatever
diverting the Brothers from pride, to turn them toward the true path
Napoleon also did all in his power. He caused the words Maison de ma
of the “great nation” and the “great man,” and regretted our rupture
of the oft-repeated passage of the sonata. Prince Andrew stopped and
Natásha’s face twitched. She frowned and lowered her eyes for a moment.
in five years. He received ten thousand rubles a year, but now resolved
still merrier, and some of them could not refrain from laughter, for
great men,” says history. And, indeed, human reason replies: every time
When he returned to the room Pierre was sitting in the same place as
man’s free will, a scientific enunciation of those laws is impossible,

of that man’s will to the Deity, history cannot without contradictions
It lies in the fact that an historic character like Alexander I,
from having experienced the change of feeling toward Napoleon and the
I know I can’t prevent your doing so, but if you have a spark of
promised the Rostóvs to bring them, from Count Rostopchín whom he knew
to Weyrother sat Count Langeron who, with a subtle smile that never left
pockmarked peasant woman with the little girl, and when the patrol
we find that a command can never be the cause of the event, but that a

returned home just before dinner. As soon as he entered he noticed and

was pretty, but this no longer gave her satisfaction as it used to.
He patted her on the shoulder and himself closed the door after her.


events have no common sense and are all contradictory, as in the case of

The sergeant ran up to the officer and in a frightened whisper informed
previously had listened to the discussion at the Austerlitz council of
soldiers had kindled on the road. Rostóv, too, dragged himself to the
greater the pain and shame in her soul. She knew for certain that she
vileness, horrified that the former purity of her soul was again lost to
prisoners, and that one of their comrades, a German soldier, had been
to dine with the Emperor and the court footmen who served at table,

it had the commander in chief continued to look at him, and so Kutúzov,
losing confidence in its allies, suffering from shortness of supplies,

could not understand why he was so particularly animated and happy
away from her. “Destroying the army, destroying the men! And why? Go,

interests are all in the East, and in regard to Bonaparte the only thing
Abbé Morio? He is a most interesting man.”
right and that she would tell about it next day. On hearing of Countess
young, all our octogenarians were reviewed, and of Prozoróvski
then addressed Pierre.
drawing room, and also to Anna Pávlovna herself who had received the


“Yes, I knew it long ago but had forgotten. I knew that I could expect


direct hundreds of thousands of others struggling with death, and he
landowner’s snuggery, maidservants had been flattered by his notice, and
Pierre could not and did not wish to break this silence.

house Prince Andrew had built at Boguchárovo, ever in the same state,
boots between the dining and drawing rooms, hastily greeting the

came into the room and sat down on the broad benches in the corner

horrors that occurred did not stagger his soul. He boldly took the
convoy? Release them, that’s all about it!”
“What do you mean?” asked Speránski quietly, lowering his eyes.
    CHAPTER X
After the junction with the army of the brilliant admiral and Petersburg
letter the arrival of which had so amazed Nicholas.

Each historian, according to his view of what constitutes a nation’s
Napoleon smiled and told them to give the Cossack a horse and bring the
to his beautiful sister, but yet more by the fact that in spite of
He did not renounce his opinions, but felt himself in some way to blame
all those ideas that seem so important to us, are unnecessary. We cannot


breathless cry of children’s voices filled the room. “Two, two!” they

the history of the life of the peoples.
genius of which Thiers remarks that, “His genius never devised anything
Speránski, and by the diversity of lines of argument he used to

“Eh, who’s there? Come in, come in! What news?” the field marshal called

far. By intrigues, violence, exile, and executions, French society—I
in among some ranks of infantry marching ahead of him. He tried to pass

Rostóv did not listen to the soldier. He looked at the snowflakes
were forever washed away from his imagination and memory the agitating
“One used to have to be a German—now one must dance with Tatáwinova
Kutúzov without replying, striking the table with his podgy fist. “They
conditions for fighting.

had involuntarily overheard her. Natásha blushed at that recollection

among the women!”

“I do not, and did not, desire war,” he continued, “but it has been
they would all be enrolled as Cossacks; at another of a new religion to
shed, and its tone was so sincere that he could not but listen.
but which possesses qualities resembling those of the symbol.”



needs, while great freedom in the choice of occupation—such freedom as
continually all his life—was now near to him and, by the strange

“Altogether such heroism as was displayed by the Russian warriors
The movement of peoples from west to east was to be succeeded by a

wept. She saw her brother now as he had been at the moment when he took
The windows of the room in which she was lying looked westward. She

in human beings in space, in time, and in dependence on cause forms
advice and help! He is a most absent-minded and absurd fellow, but he
“Oh, I beg your pardon,” she said as if waking up. “Are you going
preoccupied, yet meekly Christian look which never left her face, Anna


boil for your grandfather.”
ground that looked like asparagus, which, for some reason, they called
“We can take four more men,” said the steward. “They can have my trap,
carry it unnoticed in his belt or under his arm. Besides, it had been
the priests, rose and offered him her seat; an aide-de-camp picked up

it timidly and tenderly on her son’s arm, “be affectionate and
He did not regain consciousness till late in the day, when with other

    CHAPTER XI
“But why shouldn’t I say I saw something? Others do see! Besides who
from Napoleon, and from the awkward wording of Memorandum No. 178. It
and, rushing headlong toward the porch with lifted tail, began rubbing
smoke saw ranks of men in uniforms of a color unfamiliar to him. They
campaign of 1807 which seemed to him so recent. “Bennigsen should have
Mávra Kuzmínichna grew abashed and confused. The officer did not
the advanced army. Prince Andrew Bolkónski came into the room with the

when, after getting up at daybreak and spending the whole morning in the
I beg of you, consider me your friend and if you want help, advice,

arranging a seat for the countess in the huge high coach that stood at
are valued for, but little that could have made him love her. He felt
reproachfully to a cannon ball that struck a cannon wheel and a man’s
fall asleep, as he leaned against the wall.
disclose neither his identity nor his knowledge of French, stood at the
innocent child of seventeen, daughter of the bewitching marquise. The
inevitable abandonment. How could the commanders lead their troops to
friend Bolkónski, whom he had not seen for two years.
sort—(le sort de l’armée d’Ulm).” * He remembered these words
were by half the world, and so he had to repudiate truth, goodness, and
of the little bottles and boxes of which Madame Schoss who was fond of

They entered the large hall, from which one of the doors led to the
wanted to, and perished because Alexander desired his destruction, and
bowing to the ground in prayer, her door creaked and Natásha, also in

“I am so glad you’ve come!” said Natásha, without answering him.
dinner. Two officers of his own division joined him. The conversation
in white and was now in light blue. They did not drag her away at once,

deprecating expression of a dog when it rapidly but feebly wags its
of Honor for the affair on the seventh of September,” he introduced
battalion and regimental commanders mounted, crossed themselves, gave
Power, from the standpoint of experience, is merely the relation that

laughed loudest.
the sounds of music that had immediately struck up. Behind him walked

And the feeling of energy with which the troops had started began to
handing a pipe he had finished to an hussar riding behind him, with as
army, gains a victory by killing three, five, or ten thousand men, and
resounded on the planks of the bridge, and the squadron, officers in
rival to his own Mílka.
“May I call in that boy who was taken prisoner and give him something to
three beats: “Oh mio crudele affetto.”... One, two, three... one,

disturbed him. “Well, what business is it of mine what goes on
from over there—and seize it by the throat in a death grip!” A
in front of him was misty darkness. Rostóv could see nothing, peer as
evidently did not expect.
“I come from the archduchess’. I heard nothing there.”
“I helped you, but all the same I must tell you the truth; it is a
holy science of our order all is one, all is known in its entirety and
feels, anyone who comes in sight of the enemy, and that feeling gives
behind moved infantry. The commander in chief was standing at the end of
“Yes, I should think...” Natásha began.


means to rest after a ceremony. He drew his left foot out of the stirrup
and snorting horse and, accompanied by the dogs yelping at her, took her
Prince Andrew expressed his ideas so clearly and distinctly that it was
On the evening of the twenty-sixth of August, Kutúzov and the whole
man with the white forehead, black eyebrows, and red lips.

Sónya was unhappy at the separation from Nicholas and still more so on

receiving it. This gratitude reminded him of how much more he might do

cannon ball. All this was possible. In former battles he had only
to their chatter. Anatole kept on refilling Pierre’s glass while
awful...” and he burst into tears.
his hand Prince Andrew came up to his comrade, the aide-de-camp on duty,
till May, and asked him to be more economical this time. Nicholas had
to the essence of man’s free will but its manifestation in the past and
Very fine!”



in the calèche, dozing and waking up by turns, and listening for any

Natásha. “You know it happened the very day we were rescued. I saw him.
great many officers like him were always coming there and that everybody
reasonable thing left to do is to conclude peace as soon as possible,
“Ready, your Serene Highness,” replied the general.
a beaver cap came riding toward him on a handsome raven-black horse,
“Tss, tt...!” said the little man. “Ah, what a sin... what a sin!” he
opinion sure to carry him off. But on the seventh day he ate with
a handsome adjutant. This was Prince Bolkónski. Beside him was his
Natásha knew he was talking about her and this afforded her pleasure.
regiment—instead of the straggling, disorderly crowd it had been on
auntie Anna Mikháylovna told me, under the seal of strict secrecy, of
hide them and left the room.
and that I had nothing to forgive. It gave me joy to tell her this. She
“Really?” asked Princess Mary, looking into Pierre’s kindly

own army had melted away to half before reaching Krásnoe and a whole

After these words, the Mason, as if tired by his long discourse, again
flung himself to the ground to avoid being knocked over, and a riderless
to be done in these circumstances? To favor revolutions, overthrow


After tea, Nicholas, Sónya, and Natásha went to the sitting room, to
medal he can get his reward just as well in the rearguard, but if he
three-year-old girl in a pink dress was lying under a seat.
had recognized in the corporal’s words and in the roll of the drums.
over the red baize at the entrance, she entered the hall, took off her
this young Jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested. All were

yard and fetch a fowl, please, a cock, and you, Misha, bring me some
the reasons that convinced him that Métivier was a spy. Though these
this news stifled all sympathy for the man they both liked.
and the more power he has over others, the more evident is the
he was supposed to hold was no longer his. And he understood this not
Princess Mary shook her head.

glanced at Rostóv with a feigned smile and waved his hand in greeting.
Still smiling, the French officer spread out his hands before Gerásim’s

Now her face and body were often all that one saw, and her soul was
Márya Dmítrievna only shrugged her shoulders.
results of the ill-directed will of one or more individuals, that is,
reliable information about that sitting, concerning which various rumors

with a sallow, bloated, angry face, who was wearing a Kazán dressing
ingratiating and appealing smile, and took his hand that he might not go

landowner, fourteen miles away, who had the stud. Everything seemed to

people who talk like that either do not know what they are talking about
An hour and a half later most of the players were but little interested
And Terénty would begin talking of the destruction of Moscow, and of
For Russian historians, strange and terrible to say, Napoleon—that most
“Ah, Prince! In what sad circumstances we meet again! And how is our
the Guards to the field of battle, afraid of letting a ready victim

and sat down on a crimson throne. The maiden who had been first in white
him, for the crowd pressed from all sides, swaying as one mass with them
“Let us go ourselves. I only came round to ask Denísov about
in a camp.
CHAPTER XXXII
always shall, and I want nothing more.”
She had determined not to tell her and persuaded her father to hide the

“Is my carriage ready?” asked Rostopchín, stepping back from the window.
of Moscow habits in which he felt himself held captive and lead him to a
“Who can tell, your honor?” replied the hussar reluctantly.
opponents; now grow severely logical, or suddenly rise to the realm of
greatness of soul?” said the little princess, smiling and drawing her
Princess Mary turned to Sónya and, trying to stifle the hostile
give their blessing to such a marriage. Nicholas, for the first time,



to reach the boundary strip in sixteen paces. A whizz and a thud! Five
the last two years, as a result of his continual absorption in abstract
Half an hour later the squadron was lined up on the road. The command
wounded and understanding that the matter is no joke but concerns his
put—which, in fact, his plan did not answer—as to avail himself of the
hand with it and knew he must not do so. Having advanced six paces and
“There was a letter from Prince Andrew today,” he said to Princess
attained: the transition from retreat to advance, an exposure of the
other voices.
rewards comes to complain, and the inhabitants of the district pray to
old count felt this most. He would probably have been unable to state

Dólokhov, who had no reason to preserve the honor of a man who was
his throat. “I’m galloping to the commander of the corps. How do matters
with sleepy eyes, tell Princess Mary anything. With just the same smile


readiness to fall in love and an expectation of happiness.

“A good thing too, little countess,” said “Uncle,” “only mind
“Made what?”
attempts to attain it were most shamefully baffled—then this last period

him disputing hotly with his visitor. Pierre was maintaining that a time
“And how’s your father?”
me; but he did not reply, gave me a kind look, and then we suddenly
physics) of patriotism which was present in all these men he had seen,
present himself at Bennigsen’s quarters at six that evening.
as he felt himself to be at that moment. He was conscious that here

opinion, he merely said:

come. He was alone now, except for a soldier who was sitting naked at
Pierre appeared in the stalls. The Rostóvs had not seen him since
voulu, George Dandin,’ that’s all we have to say about it!”
recalled his exertions and solicitations, and the history of his project
All that day and the next his friends and comrades noticed that Rostóv,
seems less heavy.”
something to eat a while ago. He was awfully hungry!”
not bring himself to do so.
advancing by forced marches toward Znaim, which lay sixty-six miles
worthy of it. This rescript began with the words: “Sergéy Kuzmích,

brightly upon the Danube and the dark hills around it. It was calm, and

a clear blue sky, and the sun’s vast orb quivered like a huge hollow,
thumb to the room where Telyánin was sitting, he frowned and gave a
really.... It was all very simple and horrible.”
corps of prisoners, bundles of enemy eagles and standards, cannon and
He could not believe that her fate was sealed, especially as he had
“And who will inherit his wealth?” he added in a whisper.
flogging bench a stout man with red whiskers, in blue stockings and

with Turkey in 1811 independently of Kutúzov, and found that peace had
this party belonged the foreign nobles, Wolzogen, Wintzingerode, and
the loss of Prince Andrew had reached Bald Hills, and in spite of the
army from the Ryazána to the Kalúga road and to the Tarútino camp—the
right up to the road, six Cossacks were posted to report if any fresh
“I know that she loves... will love you,” Princess Mary corrected
    CHAPTER VI
Pierre ran down the slope once more.

slope by the pond, where no one could see her. She did not know how

watched for it too.
as a dense cloud of smoke arose from it. The hussars had succeeded in
from every side, and invoked his terrible name to shatter each other’s
was a passage in which a partition with ragged curtains could be
“No, dearest, sweet one, honey, I won’t give up—I know you know
the valves opening and wheels turning; but I have no right to conclude
beautiful eyes. Last night a proposition was made me on your account
to him at once began speaking like a man who values every moment of his
Two or three priests who were found in Moscow did try to carry out
Emperor noticed her and honored her with a dance.
she was, Natásha, who knew how sensitive her mother was to anything
when everyone is expecting the inevitable catastrophe, as many as
princess, Alpátych had his own belongings taken out of the carts which
to be silent. But after a while, just as a jury comes out of its room,

most strongly expressed his insincere love for her, and he felt the
and, doing so, groaned involuntarily.
her heart and she neither could nor would speak lightly of him. Nicholas
estates and which many people envied proved to be extremely valuable and
this...” and all in a way that seemed to say: “We, you and I,

The sun had reached the other side of the house, and its slanting rays
of the Emperor.”
unexpectedly, with a kindly and foolish smile.
him.
the peoples as clerk to master.
seemed that the ball the hussars were giving in honor of the Polish
with a lady passed by, evidently not recognizing them. The handsome
his view of what was good for the people, we must inevitably assume that
everything is calculated, and I don’t like that. But Denísov...”
“I should think he has a score of them.”
shrubbery. (This shrubbery was a well-known haven of refuge for culprits
“Show me the way, show me, I... I’ll do it,” gasped Pierre rapidly.

Kuzmích, asking what the point of the story was as he had not heard it

hand he held carefully back, because he wished to support his right
here, and there’s nobody living in it.”
“Well—had a good time?” said the old count, smiling gaily and
frigid politeness.
not right!’ Our luck is like water in a dragnet: you pull at it and it
free will we arrive at absurdity, while by admitting our dependence on
At the bridge they all halted, waiting for those in front to get across.
“That’s so. But we must know what troops they are and their numbers,”
nice too! I need nobody.”

wagons, soldiers, gun carriages, carriages, soldiers, ammunition carts,
Moscow, and when did I do so? When was it decided? Can it have been



said.
During the entr’acte a whiff of cold air came into Hélène’s box,




him ‘Your Majesty,’ but who, to his chagrin, got no title from
by the authorities at that time was Napoleon’s attempt to stop the
the possessor of wealth. How have you used it? What have you done
from under her brows at the young men.
man? On such matters I am only severe with myself. I understand such
said an old maid who lived with the Melyukóvs, during supper.
remembered that, two days before, that man had burned his shirt while
consciousness as well as the muscular and nervous activity.

advanced line under the fire of the French and had there twice fired
it has gone over. But this one has hit!” And again he started trying
surprise.”

    CHAPTER XIX
one another, and in her heart she sided with “Granddad.” In the midst of
He said a few words to Prince Andrew and Chernýshev about the present
not understand. One was taller than the other; he wore an officer’s hat
Mary, really this dress does not suit you. I prefer you in your little
“Well then, Peter Kirílych, come along with us, we’ll take you there.”
“A Frenchman or a Russian prince incognito,” said the officer, looking
notabilities, all the Rostóvs’ acquaintances, were at the Razumóvskis’
pictures of the magic lantern of life and regarding them now in the cold
    * I love you.
killed and wounded, thereby, he considered, testing his strength of

activity of some dozen people who did not burn houses, practice

our studies examining some campaign on the map, with a certain number of
one another. And corresponding to the event its justification appears in
and had rooms for the house serfs and apartments for visitors. Whole

pleasant with the invigorating freshness of the morning frost still in

anything. Do you know I have sent for Pierre? The count,” pointing to

busy with similar peaceful affairs—near the shelter of the regimental
    CHAPTER VI
lasted a moment. She at once set to work afresh and they now trusted her
“Forgive me!”
insignificant people appeared before him. He talked to them and
The course of the Father Confessor’s arguments ran as follows: “Ignorant

CHAPTER II
the Dorogomílov gate, but there again stopped and, dismounting from his
blushed. She felt all the time that by talking to him she was doing
“Shouldn’t we now send for Berg?” asked Borís. “He would drink
and suddenly, at the sound of the service, she felt horrified at her own
speaking of Him, my dear sir. Of what, of whom, are we speaking? Whom




Prince Andrew began to explain to her the reasons for this delay.
here. You may be better off than we others,” said Pierre.
party, a real evening party, subtle allusions to the tender passion were

Russian commanders was the one naturally suggesting itself, namely, a
him and everything he could say had long been known to him, that he was

Malásha, who kept her eyes fixed on what was going on before her,
want that. And besides, what a notion that medicine ever cured anyone!
not disturbing himself or desiring anything.
this life to love her husband, her children, little Nicholas, and all
“To his Honor Baron Asch, from General-in-Chief Prince Bolkónski,” he
ranks; Anatole was in the army somewhere in the provinces; Prince Andrew
that solemn moment felt himself enraptured by all that he had heard (as
youthful expression in his friend’s face.
He closed his eyes and remained silent a long time. Then as if in
in many churches that had not been burned. Donors contributed
“Yes, you are a great friend of Bolkónski’s, no doubt she wants to send
“They even say,” remarked the “man of great merit” who did not yet
moved by fear or vanity, rejoiced or were indignant, reasoned, imagining
theory arrived at by years of toil, should be carried out. He was
The secretary was told to write down the resolution of the Moscow
contented with his life. Of late, in 1809, he found in letters from home
say.

sight of his superiors, he did not notice the staff of the banner and

These conditions of life had been the same before, but then they were
that I’m a sharper, so I advise you to be careful.”
shadow of the wall. Pausing for a moment, Pierre noticed several other
work.
words.
since the nursing mothers were no longer sent to work on his land, they
expression of will in any action, our own or another’s, the first demand
Armfeldt, Adjutant General Wolzogen, Wintzingerode (whom Napoleon had
“Ah, my dear, I hardly knew you,” said Anna Mikháylovna with a
Anna Mikháylovna looked at Véra and paused. The countess pressed her
town and was returning to the inn. The groom recognized Pierre in the
field beyond the village came now sounds of regimental music and now the
generals I have known were, on the contrary, stupid or absent-minded

other virtues—love of his neighbor, and especially generosity.

and among them at the Rostóvs’ with whom he had renewed acquaintance


rubles I don’t know what to do with, and she stands in her tattered


first soldier in the rank, stepped briskly forward.
they are beaten, flogged, or sent to Siberia, I don’t suppose they are

the left! Wait a bit.” But the soldiers, crowded together shoulder to
silence as he left the drawing room. He pictured the vanity of his
of the army regulations quickly receded to a secondary place in his

“Your excellency! Your excellency! Your excellency!” he kept repeating
an unexpected and tenderly paternal way.
according to our greater or lesser knowledge of the circumstances in
Pope himself would hear of her and would send her a certain document.
lovers—began smiling, spreading out their arms, and bowing.
surmises and the rewards this or that general received; but the question
as it were, a council to elucidate certain questions for the Emperor
extremely—whether he was promoted to a captaincy or would receive the
of firing. Drawing himself up, he viewed the field of battle opening out
hatred and shame in all our subjects? What are we scared at and of whom
been staying at her brother’s with her husband and children since early
“What?” said Kutúzov, in the midst of Denísov’s explanations, “are you



stopping at the door, “why I’m especially fond of that music? It is
years of their lives on that business. But, above all, that thought
his attention wandered from the book and the Square and he formed in
recognized him at once by his peculiar figure, which distinguished him
over his spectacles seeing no one.
transit gloria mundi.”
his weak, human, unheroic sides; but as it was, Speránski’s strange

who looked at her was thinking only of what had happened to her. With a
“Oh, how lovely! Now go to sleep, and there’s an end of it.”
the sofa. The princess came in. She had changed her gown for a house
tooth or hair remained.
“And he no doubt is calming her jealousy of me. They needn’t trouble

strangely softened but agitated expression on his face. He came up the
headquarters, it was possible to succeed in many ways unthinkable at
This is the battle of Pultúsk, which is considered a great victory but
the Kolochá, a mist had spread which seemed to melt, to dissolve, and to

second broadsheet stated that our headquarters were at Vyázma, that

between the various plans that were proposed had even increased after

crowded together close to his wheels and his horses. “What a fellow!
I’ve nothing against it,” the prince said to himself, “but he must
lair and its food. One part of it dispersed and waded knee-deep
noticed Prince Andrew’s attentions to Natásha, decided that at a

reports that Prince Auersperg was defending Vienna?” he said.
through the clear morning air penetrating streaks of rosy, golden-tinted
“He is Minister of War, a man trusted by the Emperor, and I need not
up the steps to where the coffin stood, to give her the farewell kiss.
Among those whom Julie’s guests happened to choose to gossip about were
not replying to the Austrian.

“Darling Denísov!” screamed Natásha, beside herself with rapture,
days in advance, the order had certainly already been given for everyone
seemed to her that someone was there standing behind the screen in the
come to the governor to ask how they were to deal with their various

and handsome young man and woman for one another. And this human feeling
“I should think so!” replied Natásha’s laughing eyes.
had instantly noticed her brother’s condition. But, though she noticed
forgot the sovereigns’ presence. “Lads, it’s not the first village
widows of live men, make beautiful conversations over our charpie, only
“If I were Tsar I would never go to war,” said Nesvítski, turning

little fingers. “All right! Then it’s settled?”
difficulties had told Nicholas that this was all he could let him have

“Late! It’s nearly ten o’clock,” answered Natásha’s voice.
love you.”

and that she had known it a long time (it seemed so to her because she
since he himself was so firmly convinced that it was good, indeed
from which he had fired. He swayed like a drunken man, taking some steps
previous performance Semënova had fallen down on the stage.
him. Twice he had executed commissions to the Emperor himself, so

BOOK FOUR: 1806
flank now that it is nearly four o’clock and the battle is lost?

ignoble departure from Africa, leaving his comrades in distress, is
“You are in love with me?” Natásha broke in.


Ermólov.
“The path to Warsaw, perhaps,” Prince Hippolyte remarked loudly and
But at noon the adjutant of the regiment came into Rostóv’s and


on seeing Rostóv before him, with whom he would inevitably collide.
dinner, the maid’s inquiry what dress to prepare, or worse still any
the whole truth: what sort of girl is she, and what do you think of

rapidly.
insisted on her coming with me.”
Why are you hindering us?” Another in the same place turned round and
Tell me what I am to do, dear princess!” he added after a pause, and
seized him. He stopped at the threshold and asked in Russian whether
otherwise, for in order that the will of Napoleon and Alexander (on whom
and acquaintances, invitations, and social occupations were so numerous
The chief action of the battle of Borodinó was fought within the seven
way, and, blushing far more than Borís, began to speak with a feeling

her. How often when considering her character I have told myself that


order without clinging to anything to wander in hempen rags from place

is interrupted. He listened to what Langeron said, as if remarking,
a despot. Who is right and who is wrong? No one! But if you are
“Well, talk as much as you can, anyway. He has a passion for giving


Just then a closed carriage and another with a hood drove up to the
No one in the house sent people about or gave them as much trouble as
against one another, you two, and I’ll look on!”
“It’s all over; but I am a coward—yes, a coward!” thought
hospitals. The one and the other may serve as a pastime. But what’s
from him as from a common enemy. This happened not because they were
holding up his sword, he addressed Chernýshev and asked in German where
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
went on of itself. The killed were dragged from the front, the wounded


intended to remain at Podólsk and had no thought of the Tarútino
have done anything but make a return movement toward Moscow, describing
He noticed this hesitation in Dron’s look and therefore frowned and
Loaded carts stood at the house next to Ferapóntov’s and women were
face and whole figure, the Russians stared at Pierre because they could
So young, and burdened with such riches—to what temptations he will be
his father dismissed the abbé and said to the young man, “Now go

word infected the whole crowd with a feeling of panic.
involuntarily by this diminutive expressing his affection and the hopes


is presented to him as his dominion, and guards are given to him and
heavily, panted past him, and he heard the fall of a body and saw Daniel
Natásha to sing.
“Now for the recitation!” said Speránski on returning from
     Russian army, I must say that your victory was not
raised his hand to his white Horse Guard’s cap with a red band and no
Ivánovna, the priest was a man of very severe and lofty life. There were
    CHAPTER VIII
“But how are you to get that balance?” Pierre was beginning.
“Decision? What decision? Old dotard!...” cried he. “What have you been


up her sleeves still higher. Pierre approached, looking at her in a

Just as he went in he saw that the nurse was hiding something from him
nonsense,” he thought. “The slur on my name and honor—that’s all
at the head of a movement that had already become unrestrainable. He was
pleasant face and resonant though not loud voice, attracted everyone’s
too. I can read him like a book. At present he is hesitating whom to lay
“Do you believe in a future life?” he asked.

always poking fun at me.... Ah, well! Let him!” And he began reading
As soon as she began to speak of that, her lips trembled and her tears

window. Nesvítski, moving his moist lips as he chewed something, and
extremely kind to him and told him to visit them again.
yourself imagine the effect this news has had on me, and your silence
meeting arrives. Not daring to look round and without looking round, he
fix his whole attention. A healthy man can tear himself away from the

through the conservatories, the serfs’ quarters, and the outbuildings,
to the maid, “bring the princess her gray dress, and you’ll see,
personage), evidently feeling offended at having to wait so long, sat
there was a tattered sofa, a worn carpet, and portraits of Suvórov, of
said his prayers, dressed, and, with an unpleasant consciousness of
insoluble and terrible as ever, and Pierre hastily picked up a book, and
began to cry.
floundered about in that dirty pool like carp stuffed into a watering
Russians with anxious and timid faces, and Frenchmen with an air not of
Beauché; I’ll keep the best palace in Moscow for you! Au revoir. Good
was impossible to see it clearly with the naked eye. Our right flank was
her talk with Dron and at the meeting, had actually had so bad an effect

In the morning all that was left of the night mist on the heights was
departments of government.
that he did not wish to bind Natásha and gave her perfect freedom. If
because they had to leave billets they had grown accustomed to, or some
only betrayed us three times in three years. We take up their cause, but
was just the Cossack, Likhachëv, who was sitting under the wagon, but it
Prince Andrew smiled.


that the man was taking off his leg bands, and the way he did it aroused
and outlined everything. The smoke of the guns mingled with this mist,
in our house, aren’t they?”
broke up two squares, your excellency.”
by the very nature of the case those who command take the smallest part
walk in Thy paths, (1) to conquer anger by calmness and deliberation,
if convinced that Balashëv, as a Russian, must be flattered by his
hurriedly, evidently no longer trying to show the advantages of peace
off her engagement without consulting anybody? It’s true this engagement
while under the supervision of the countess and the solicitude of the
could not possibly be, and so did not deliver the order.
“If it were true that he has been beaten, news would have come.”
“Why, is it late?”
before, with his head in his hands. His face expressed suffering. He
remember everything?” said Natásha, with an expressive gesture,

on his organization, his character, and the motives acting upon him; yet
“The eggs... the eggs are teaching the hen,” muttered the count through
me,” she said, trying to smile, but her tears still flowed and sobs
the bridge unobserved, flings the bags of incendiary material into
his head as if in perplexity.
suitability of which serious doubts were beginning to be felt.
watching and it creaked very slightly as she disappeared behind it.
narrated that episode so persistently and with so important an air that
the foreman of a spinning mill, when he has set the hands to work, goes
After reading about the dangers that threatened Russia, the hopes the
to smile but dared not even think of doing so. He made a piteous,
managed to sit down in a particular chair before anyone else and
reference to its effect on others, but simply in relation to himself, to
Anatole’s expression, though his eyes were fixed on her, referred not
him any longer in Moscow, away from the countess whom he missed. Márya
after calling her so in his presence did Natásha notice it herself.
All the advantages were on our side. Our enormous forces, undoubtedly
Tarútino and Vyázma, to hastening it on while easing the movement of our
will all the same never be like those Petersburg young men.”
carrying a large loaded tray. With hospitable dignity and cordiality in
as infallible) that the Shevárdino Redoubt was an advanced post—whereas
seemed confused and blushed as if not knowing what to say.

CHAPTER VII
do me the honor of calling on me on Wednesday,” he added, “I will,
girl seemed to say by the smile that replaced the threatened tears, as
beside Dólokhov, nudging with his elbow in a friendly and offhand way
knew how to listen so that people readily told him their most intimate

reward him if he does right.”
“Yes, here in this forest was that oak with which I agreed,” thought
present itself again. And this very absence of an aim gave him the
the first fortification. General Campan’s division did not seize the

There are two sides to the life of every man, his individual life, which
say more to the frightened and shamefaced count, he lashed the heaving
their heels the greater distance they had to cover. Only by following
peace. The old man was beside himself: moved the chair on which he was
just completed. He lay with his head propped high on the pillows. His
the passage, heard with fear and delight first the young count’s voice
the place of mourning for the younger female generation in the Rostóv
company’s baggage wagon, piled high, leather covered, and hemmed in on
inaudibly, now covering herself up head and all, and now peeping at her
Friant’s division disappeared as the others had done into the smoke
seven hours? I think you remember that, your excellency?”
Just then another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince Andrew

the French, after crossing the bridge at Vienna, were advancing in
observations were men who had no belief in anything, nor desire for

his protégé Kutúzov, but remained silent when the commander in chief was
evidently much excited. Rostóv moved to the window to see whom he was
saw nothing of what occupied everyone else. Not only did she fail to
The old count’s horse, a sorrel gelding called Viflyánka, was led by


Only one terrible doubt sometimes crossed his mind: “Wasn’t it all
together; and “boom, boom!” came the sounds confirming what the eye had
countess’ gigantic footman in his bass voice, entering the drawing
from the man who gave it or from the Emperor and whether it had to be
separately through his thin compressed lips, “I will throw him down
kindhearted, and because they—friends from childhood—had to think
and the dignity of France was thereby offended.



long she had been there when she was aroused by the sound of a woman’s
Métivier, who came in the morning with his felicitations, considered
“‘To him that hath shall be given, and from him that hath not shall be
screwing up his eyes and shaking with suppressed laughter, and unable
heard.”
should annihilate him, but then feels that his arm drops powerless and
persuaded to make peace. They are burning for the combat,” declared this

“You will find the beautiful Hélène here, whom it is always
It’s true he has been reinstated, but how could they fail to do that?
Russian envoy, Balashëv began a speech he had prepared long before:



thought, “but how am I to tell them all that I see? I have tried, and
recollection of him. “If he had told me he was drunk and did not see...
“On the contrary, Your Majesty,” said Balashëv, hardly able to remember
general, but at a time like this how they appoint a decrepit, blind old

with a sigh he could not suppress, as they passed out of the palace.
second. “Don’t dare to think about it,” she said to herself,
His hopes for the future?... Yes and no. The chief reason was a sudden,
smiled, and rested his foot against the orchestra screen.
yourself in a position to be attacked, but yourself to attack. Believe
who had marched so gaily and complacently. But at the moment the first
“Cossack!” she said threateningly.
the Epistles and Gospels. Let us not seek to penetrate what mysteries

and that tomorrow everyone would be sent out beyond the Three Hills


of deviating from what had previously seemed the most natural course—a
before Prince Andrew could finish, an aide-de-camp came in to summon
have gone through,” and she sympathetically turned up her eyes.
And Dunyásha, with clenched teeth, without replying but with an
Joseph, his valet, handed him his sabretache and saber, and they all
The strangeness and absurdity of these replies arise from the fact that
on both sides. Behind our position was a steep and deep dip, making it

“The Grand Marshal of the palace,” wrote the governor, “complains
you positively that Hélène is as innocent before you as Christ was
because of its incongruities, was exactly what was wanted at that stage
to preserve certain proprieties while affording satisfaction to
From that day a tender and passionate friendship such as exists only
“I never go back on my word,” he said. “Besides, Sónya is so
Prince Vasíli readily adopted her tone and the little princess also
the nations? Adorable! It is enough to make one’s head whirl! It is as
“I’m certain of it; you’ll see.”
“That’s all the same,” continued Márya Dmítrievna. “If they hear of
humanity’s movement. The most usual generalizations adopted by almost
you too will have to mount a horse,” remarked the old count, addressing
Pierre clutched his temples, and turning round went into the forest,


times and the same notes were thrummed again, but the listeners did
But even if—imagining a man quite exempt from all influences, examining
consciousness that something great and mysterious was being accomplished
her a pretty and fresh young girl, with whom he did not deign to unite

The clerk glanced round, evidently hoping that his joke would be
attack a weaker one and annihilate him, or at least oblige him to
battle that has been won.
society had lost her former influential connections. She had now come to

halfway. Fine orders!” was being repeated on different sides.
and handed him two letters.
good-by yet. I will call round in case you have any commissions for me,”

and at every station gave fresh orders to accelerate the movement of his

sixth stroke. The doctors pronounced recovery impossible. After a mute
moment later he heard a cry from the wooded ravine that a fox had been
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
had been confined and in which her greatest comfort had been prayer.
had sent in good time to Moscow for a doctor and were expecting him at

“No, Mamma, I’m not in love with him, I suppose I’m not in love
But all that evening and next day reports came in one after another
generals flocked there to select calèches and coaches for themselves.
the parquet to the door opening into the garden, where, seeing Balashëv
“Glad to do our best!” shouted the soldiers.
us nice news of a victory by the Archduke Karl or Ferdinand (one
“Well, that’s all—everything,” said Natásha.
On the way back Nicholas drove at a steady pace instead of racing and
sinking to his knees in the muddy field, and all one could see was
the eyes of the Guardsman’s horse. The heavy black horse, sixteen

vent it.

fighting army (with the Pávlograds on the right flank of the front);
with a sincere desire to act on this advice. In the evening he came

this: the unsettled question of life and death, which hung not only over
quite true; he had been indebted to her father for the first steps in
“Eh?”
The Emperor thanked Prince Andrew and bowed. Prince Andrew withdrew and
hard.... For ages, from our forefather Adam to our own day, we labor to

“He is a very, very nice, honest, and pleasant fellow,” answered

time to waste. On the fifteenth, the day of the old prince’s death,


are the French!’ Murat, seeing that all is lost if the sergeant is
Platón Karatáev must have been fifty, judging by his stories of

was there on the hilltop, and kept constantly looking at the patches

and in the general catastrophe one could not disregard oneself and one’s
replace some chessmen that were falling. He was about to embrace his
“Well, let’s go,” said Denísov, and rode all the way to the watchhouse
shot and the cry of “stretchers!” was heard. Most of the time, by their
Like all men who have grown up in society, Prince Andrew liked meeting
and there broke through that cloud. A great number of people crowded in
He unbuttoned his coat and sat down on a bench in the porch.
was mentioned and, pointing to his forehead, remarked:
till ten o’clock.

he pitied his friend the more did he think with contempt and even with
All were silent. Túshin appeared at the threshold and made his way
he commanded was in an almost hopeless position. The spy reported that
look. “A misfortune... about Peter Ilýnich... a letter,” she finished
fragmentary sentences tried to explain about a doll which she produced
be on intimate relations. He had never missed a carousal at Danílov’s
only when he himself had offered to undertake them, he now found an
    CHAPTER XV
this war was that the old prince never spoke of it, did not recognize
repeating the terms of the bet, addressing himself particularly to
company, which alone had maintained its order in the wood and, having


As he passed through the forest Prince Andrew turned several times to

squeaking on its runners as though freezing to the snow, its deep-toned

be better dressed than others, and would rather deprive himself of many
This first long conversation with Speránski only strengthened in Prince
tell you why.”

Prince Andrew, evidently confused. “I know that out of a million
distance. In his mind, a painful process was going on which he could

away,” or, “The wind has brought up the clouds.” And in the same way the

The Guards had made their whole march as if on a pleasure trip, parading

“Zat, my dear sir, is vy...” he concluded, drinking a tumbler of

have had to retire of their own accord, for they had no water for men
with those about him began, he alone said that the battle of Borodinó
subject, “that the Emperor himself would not be satisfied to find in us
state and power might be arranged were it possible for all that to
believe me,” he went on, growing warmer and beating his chest, “I’ll



the fear of her father, and even the possibility of love and of family

“Yes, it seems he is ill. People are always disturbing him,”
bury their dead, but while one has life one must live and be happy!”
wish to be seen in that mood, for hearing footsteps in the passage he
fellow.”
Lise sighed too.
activity, and guide him in planning his future actions. Just the same is
Pierre was greatly surprised by his wife’s view, to him a perfectly



“I say! Are the lads asleep?” asked Pétya.
would make him laugh as he used to laugh. And his eyes—how I see those
       l    m    n    o    p    q    r    s
an explosion, a whistle of splinters as from a breaking window frame,
At that instant the sun began to hide behind the clouds, and other
much as a sailor is by his ship. However far he has walked, whatever

me luck!”
fields of winter rye, downhill where snow still lodged near the bridge,

Denísov, Pétya, and the esaul, accompanied by some Cossacks and the
the whole human race, offering it in our members an example of piety

crossed the ballroom, pointing to Natásha.
At such moments Princess Mary would think how intellectual work dries

He remained silent awhile.
from passing, “won’t this be too much for poor Uncle at a moment
seen.
the duchy to the Duke of Oldenburg”—and there would have been no war.
Having cleared the way Denísov stopped at the end of the bridge.
“And ask whether sharpshooters have been posted,” he added. “What
and let us talk sensibly while there is still time, be it a day or be it
what he was saying was out of place, tactless and unsuitable, that

case. They say Plátov took ‘Poleon himself twice. But he didn’t know

Prince Andrew frowned and remained silent.
“Angina? Oh, that’s a terrible illness!”

stone-built Krémlin had died away the French heard a strange sound above
“Of course I do, I remember his teeth as if I had just seen them.”
get there and fire the bridge or will the French get within grapeshot

he had prepared, but what, quite appropriately, occurred to him at the
sometimes stopping short, gesticulating, and lisping: “the position
built lodge close to the pond. Antón, a man who had looked after Prince
troops below the hill and fell far short of the enemy, a little smoke
away from them, and they both knew that this had to be so and that it
now gradually opening before me.” But five of the other virtues which
and admit historical events which are exceptions to the theory.
“Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience,” said he,

a word and has no real existence. But to understand phenomena man
pearls on their bare shoulders, looked at themselves in the brilliantly
kind, pleasant face and how he smiles as he looks at me.”
worn and irritable. The infantry passing before him came to a halt
“Isn’t she exquisite?” she said to Pierre, pointing to the stately
Everyone waited, so emphatically and eagerly did he demand their
toward the sofa she had indicated. As soon as Anna Mikháylovna had
hundred serfs; but one of these estates had already been sold, and the
with something more than curiosity and sympathy. He noticed that they
“Dear princess, I beg and implore you, have some pity on him! Je vous
means being Napoleon’s guest. Not only did I never see him but I heard
wanted, tell me! I will do anything,” said she, catching his eye.
never used to forget us. Is he here?”
power in which he had so lately moved—and after several marches with
master, where a great and wonderful blessing has been revealed.”

similar state of perplexity with regard to every question concerning his
visitor. “And to think it is Cyril Vladímirovich Bezúkhov’s son

He took his seat beside the aide-de-camp on duty and drove into the
he watched the serfs, trying to understand their aims and what they
shouted, though there was no one to bind him but Lavrúshka and Alpátych.
people were hurrying through the streets and there were many soldiers,
antique valor of the Russian army, which they—which it” (he corrected

contingencies... and foresees the adversary’s intentions.”
egged on against each other.
will act as they did. I will do better. Everyone shall know me, love me,
the twenty-fifth, Barclay de Tolly and Bagratión were convinced that the
better not look,” he thought, but having reached the bushes he glanced
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
question, the more subject to inevitability and the less free do our
at him and did not think, but felt, about something different. She felt
taking leave of Anna Pávlovna. “It is settled,” she added in a low
attend to the voice of their commander, or would they, disregarding him,
any contradiction and is becoming irritable. This irritability is, as
true that we are not conscious of our dependence, but by admitting our
prevent an enemy from advancing along the Smolénsk road to Moscow.
space there was, on the one side, a demonstration made by the Russians

his impulsive nature, does get into mischief (a boy can’t help it), he
son of a dishonest father, the misconduct of a woman who had fallen


In their new, clean, and light study with its small busts and pictures
tactics, as the Germans did. But the French troops quite rightly did not
Moscow?” he asked.
bloodstained post, he leaned back and, not being comfortable in that
or shame, on the contrary, with good-natured naïveté she told her
else. He came at a gallop, wearing a small hat, a blue uniform open over


very strictly to social distinctions and rarely admitted even important
promptly pretended to be astonished and awe-struck, opened his eyes

undermining C, and so on in all possible combinations and permutations.
Rhetor’s instructions. The Mason drew the shirt back from Pierre’s
The major-domo stood at the porch talking to an elderly orderly and to
of the uniform or from some other cause Pierre saw before him quite a

“Well, you must excuse me, because... because... I shall go, and that’s
to hear the details.”
finding everything upside down everywhere. Thus he stumbled on Bagovút’s
he always thought only of whatever he was engaged on.
“I did not expect this of you,” said the staff captain seriously and
dismounted. The game had begun.

as the product of many forces, can no longer, it would seem, be regarded

memory from that realm of pure and loving childhood presented itself to
losing our own men and inhumanly slaughtering unfortunate wretches? What
at the Arkhárovs’ ball, talked about the war with Field Marshal
“Well, at last I’ve finished, now I’ll rest,” thought the prince, and
mistaken in his identification of the different wards of Moscow.
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
coming from the study. The prince walked in quickly and jauntily as was


myself and you with the hope that your son is alive, for otherwise

entailing heavy expenditure, he had noticed to his surprise that he
present; and every day he went away in a fog, without having said what

the cot where she was standing, “better wait a bit... later...”
He began pacing the room. The screaming ceased, and a few more seconds

princess and Prince Vasíli, recovering themselves, followed her. A few
level of rooted custom...” or, with a smile: “But we want the wolves
particularly many round Alexander—generals and imperial aides-de-camp
planted.
devotion and that she was ready to do anything for him and for the
When the Emperor had passed nearly all the regiments, the troops began
at one another, and all pressed toward the exit from the bridge.
in despair, and you all ruined.... No, my dear, you and Sónya ought to
“Natálya Ilyníchna,” Pierre began, dropping his eyes with a feeling of
of his supposed death and the tragic loss of his wife. Besides this
speaking of commands that are the expression of the will of men acting
“Fool... or dummy!” he muttered.

CHAPTER XXVII
“Yes. Wait a bit... I... saw him,” Sónya could not help saying, not
in her daughter’s arms during the journey—as, judging by what the doctor
were silent. Their faces glowed, they were hungry and very cheerful.

giving him a mild expression, rode up to Bagratión and welcomed him as
watchful eye on the young man who so alarmed her, noticed that he was
three times and Natásha fell ill from despair, Pierre one day told her
me from the pleasure of smashing your head with this!” said Pierre,
recurred to him, and a disagreeable shiver ran down his back. But this
for some days in Moscow and was staying as usual at his father’s
“To him who has borne himself most bravely in this last war,” added

Pierre told him about the sick man.

which Dólokhov’s second had called on him, and, having closed the
old fellow? Out of sorts?”
therefore offered this truce to avoid unnecessary bloodshed. Count

“No, after dinner,” said the old count, evidently expecting much
The little princess had grown stouter during this time, but her eyes
asked to see the portrait of the aunt’s husband on the box lid.


I tell her how I’ve seen the Emperor?) Natásha... take my
“Yes, yes! I love him!” thought Natásha, reading the letter for the
“I write you in Russian, my good friend,” wrote Julie in her Frenchified
“Ha ha ha! The theater of war!” said the prince. “I have said and still
living with the Rostóvs.
They gave Prince Andrew some tea. He drank it eagerly, looking with
Ah! from suffering there is no other refuge.
his rooms upstairs.
is an admirable book which calms and elevates the soul. Adieu! Give
and comfortable horse, Viflyánka, which was turning gray, like himself.
It was the second night that neither of them had slept, watching the boy

subject on the path it now follows, seeking the causes of events in
upstairs to see Vogel and his wife who lived on the upper story.
knew was covered with powder. Behind them, wearing a smile and leaning
The usual route through Moscow could not be thought of, and the
Anatole followed him with his usual jaunty step but his face betrayed
preached on the Cross.”
Nesvítski tried to move on, soldiers and carts pushed him back again
the observation of all these “eyes of the Emperor,” became still more
Ryazán, Vladímir, and Shúya was very long and, as post horses were not
it is easy to see that there are other ways of diffusing civilization

him (as a butler at dinner informs his master that there is no more of
“There now!” said the officer of the suite, “that’s
casket for Mamma’s name day and then going home. I was so happy, so
Pierre did not answer him and asked briefly whether his proposal would
The count put his ear to the keyhole and listened.
for girls and boys.”
hitting the first man who came in his way a swinging blow on the back.
pale and breathless and his face was angry. One of his eyes was black,
been so much in the grip of inevitable laws, which compelled him, while
discussed there by a society of which Pierre was one of the principal
therefore never be at peace. A stern expression of the lofty, secret

old man continued to fold and seal his letter, snatching up and throwing
who got across the river fled farther. Their supreme chief donned a

asked for more troops.
special national histories are like paper money. They can be used and
isn’t it, General?” he said, evidently not doubting that this remark
accordance with the enemy’s movements.
it on his coat and supported himself with it. His frowning face was

starting out of his head, raising his cap and pointing before him to the
at dinner and all that evening Natásha was in a strange and unnatural
uncertainties of the position, with the menace of serious danger giving



Other detachments passed through the Krémlin and encamped along
“Do you want anything?”

her tender spots so as to torture her mentally as harshly as possible.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute
Pierre looked at her over his spectacles.
clavichord and harp. Julie by general request played first. After she
passionate affection. No one had instilled into him this love for Pierre
soldiers who were seizing the artillery horses and turning the guns
from the room with a moan either of pain or sorrow.
laughing. “Dear, dear!...”
To Borís, Julie was particularly gracious: she regretted his early
“Cut him down! I command it...” shouted Rostopchín, suddenly growing

Princess Mary did not answer. She did not understand who was to go or
Princess Mary wrote that she was in despair at the misunderstanding that

another that he was coming to dinner. Pierre felt it strange to see this
old man, shaking his powdered head as much as the tail, which Tíkhon
cupboards, and little tables. The quilt of a high, white feather bed was
The greatest crush during the movement of the troops took place at the
mushroom, and even the oak, which blossom into full growth and no longer

“Ah! what joy for the princess!” exclaimed she: “At last! I must
to him. He declared that he did not wish to remember her existence and
rein in, and turning back drew up at the crossing of the old Konyúsheny
reported the incident to a general on the staff. The state of things on

of the crowd and the shrieks of the woman were due to the fact that
and one could hear their distressing screams and groans, sometimes

had said when inviting him. The prospect of that dinner in the intimate
Having learned from experiment and argument that a stone falls
“There’s nothing for me to understand,” she cried out with
Bélaya Tsérkov where that regiment was forming, the countess was seized
and trotted downhill toward the French cavalry which was seen below to
Natásha went up to her. “You have improved in looks and grown more

then again at his feet. The former and the latter were alike familiar
neither moving forward to protect the battery nor backward with the
“Well, all the same, you must refuse him.”
considering the multiplicity and complexity of the conditions any one

he. “Fine, very fine! You have done up your hair in this new way for
“Why should we give up everything? We don’t agree. Don’t agree.... We
papers, so many people gathered that the orderlies brought in another

after the other.
high time,” she said, giving Natásha a significant look. “The old
sufficient in Moscow for the whole army—and methodically to collect the

the aim of the Russians was to stop the French, to cut them off, and

intended for you too. Give them to the woman whom you shall honor most

sum of the components must equal the resultant. This condition is never
by praise from this brilliant beauty that she blushed with pleasure.
again, under Hélène’s influence, what had seemed terrible now seemed
un-Russian shouting at their horses which were straining uphill with the
The only conception that can explain the movement of the peoples is that
has blundered looks at an examiner.
and did not once mount a horse to inspect his entrenchments.... We shall


Mikháylovna,” said Prince Vasíli, arranging his lace frill, and in
turning to look at the hussars starting in the darkness behind him, rode
Hungarian?” said the commander with an austere gibe.
men of the same kind hiding in the shadow of the house on both sides.
flèches were, but where Pierre was the smoke of the firing made it
his horse’s pace.
facts.
Yet one need only discard the study of the reports and general plans and
the contrary the greater the heat the more solidified the remaining snow
Natásha looked in the direction in which her father’s eyes were
and the sappy leaves. The left side of the forest was dark in the shade,
at night on the first of September.
shouting grew louder and louder. Rostóv could hear the sound of French
received, could not help donning a Polish uniform and yielding to the
the soil, still kept out in the fields by groundless fear, listen!
Rostóv, knitting his brows, left the room with another low bow.
Napoleon smiled and, lifting his head absent-mindedly, glanced to the
said she.
been waiting.

Rakes, those male Magdalenes, have a secret feeling of innocence
affair public. You are offended at being put on duty a bit, but why not
He had long been thinking of entering the army and would have done so


Strange as at first glance it may seem to suppose that the Massacre of


“Your information may be better than mine,” Anna Pávlovna suddenly and
then Napoleonic France itself. To strain the facts to fit the rules of
she became still more animated and chattered away giving him greetings
“Whose company?” asked Prince Bagratión of an artilleryman standing
all because we want to ape the foolish enthusiasm of those Muscovites,”

forehead was moist. Prince Andrew touched the head with his hand; even

“Yes, sir.”
stories of the Grand Duke’s quick temper he related with gusto how in
There had been actions at Lambach, Amstetten, and Melk; but despite the
ashamed of himself, he said, as if merely asking his father to let him
enveloped him completely. When she smiled doubt was no longer possible,
destruction of Moscow, and said: “How was it you promised not to abandon
position to know...”
“Yes, now you may be glad!” said she; “this is what you have
A king is history’s slave.
how it is you don’t see the charm of these delicious marvels.”
have dared to say so, knew it and blushed scarlet every time Dólokhov
“shelter” was Unterkunft in German, and his face suddenly brightened.
breathed still more quickly, but did not shed tears.
How am I to renounce forever these vile fancies, so as peacefully to

a subject near to her own heart, she could not reconcile herself to the
bold, tall, close handwriting.
at Pierre. While one hand hung up the first string the other was already

the fatigue of his old and feeble body.

    CHAPTER XVIII
Denísov’s behalf and get Denísov’s petition handed in. When he
There was a stir among the officers in the shadow beyond the fire,

this moment of happy, rapturous excitement. She gazed at him, not taking
was heard to say. His voice was calm and deliberate. “Moscow it is,
of fire and had descended into the dip, he was met by some of the staff,
exposed. Another emissary rode to the Russian line to announce the peace
Next day, by Márya Dmítrievna’s advice, Count Rostóv took Natásha
go near him. When he did so and heard the subdued moaning with which
with pride; when she spoke she noticed with fear and joy that he gazed
was immediately surrounded by courtiers on all sides. Everywhere he

would not let him, and having closed the door behind him continued her
pleasure a piece of bread with some tea, and the doctor noticed that his
will now be distributed, and surely a pardon would be granted....”
and again fixed her eyes on the corner of the stove. She had been in
found a kind of tantalizing satisfaction.
Following the superintendent of police and talking loudly the crowd went
“But perhaps that’s my shirt on the table,” he thought, “and that’s my
a soldier with a sack over his shoulder, stopped, came close up to
said Rostóv in an imploring voice, “but I can’t apologize, by God I
almost to death. And for a long time, despite the feverish haste with
added in French. “What?”
forest the horses began to snort and sweated visibly.
“What a fine fellow you are, friend!” said the Cossack to a convoy
there is a floor littered with bits of wax, excrement, dying bees
“Uncle” played the piece over again. Anísya Fëdorovna’s smiling
at Bagratión over each other’s shoulders, as if he were some rare
memory, and which he narrated with rapid gestures and glowing face, was
what will happen and don’t want to know, and can’t, but if I want
When they reached home and had told their mother how they had spent the
more important cares, but he continued to speak, surprising them by

just because it was so powerfully seductive. She took no pains with

so that he too may benefit. After dinner I fell asleep and as I was
wishes; that is my only reason for being here. I came simply to help him
enemy and of the war were contradicted and all Napoleon’s attempts at
personal matters but of the universal questions of life and death.
    CHAPTER XXII
reappeared brighter still from behind the top of the cloud, tearing its
It was Napoleon accompanied by two aides-de-camp. Bonaparte riding
of command, and from the battery one saw how those ranks of infantry
Paris. It was not calculation that guided her (she did not even for a
Prince Vasíli passed by, seeming not to hear the ladies, and sat down
perhaps he would then have been comforted and would have said that word
battle, but with his great tact and military experience carried out his
CHAPTER XXV
naïve a question. “Will he agree?”
the staff captain, “but we old fellows, who have grown up in and, God
of Bagratión’s detachment. His hussars were placed along the line


temper. But he is impossible: such a child! I don’t know what would
that however impossible it may be, it is so, for without this conception

“Ah, how bitter it is to love someone near to you and to feel
obviously trying to restrain within the bounds of decorum the excitement
but the doctor had said the fever was not very serious.
“‘I am wounded and cannot ride and consequently cannot command the

us and the merchants. Millions will pour forth from there”—he pointed




the German village of Salzeneck. The best quarters in the village were

great; all he could hear was: “ahahah!” and “rrrr!”
as men for whom her feelings were as nothing compared with her awe and



evidently wishing to give her words a very definite meaning. “I
The regimental commander sought out Dólokhov in the ranks and, reining
“What is to be done? In a few months the year will be up. The thing
feel so frightened!”
Freemasons to which he was bound by oath and which preached perpetual
hatred against anyone, and only desired that the plan, formed on a


there be in a matter in which, as in all practical matters, nothing

“No, Natásha and I sometimes don’t go to sleep till after two, so please
“What? What is it?” asked Natásha.
been appointed commander in chief. So Prince Andrew, having received an
whip in the sand when a calèche dashed up noisily. A man in a general’s

his whole soul what the stranger said. Whether he accepted the wise
Nicholas’ groom.
of approaching death. As she stepped to the door she already saw in


this murderer and villain! We alone must avenge the blood of the just
thanked,” thought the overseer, “the storm has blown over!”
“What, outside our line?”
Anna Pávlovna” as well as his daughter’s “diplomatic salon,” and often
behind the chair, held it in position. By the chair stood the priests,
Moscow. Half the wagons laden with hardtack that had traveled the first
tranquillity and ease of mind he had formerly striven in vain to reach.

present from the prince—and carrying a stick as the prince did, went out


idle, vicious life!” but dared not break the silence.
He had not decided what it should mean when he heard the voice of the

CHAPTER XXXVII
his nose, and greedily sniffed at it.

down!”
every moment of the life of kings as a tool for its own purposes.
curious to know what was going to happen and what would be revealed to
gold-embroidered velvet bag. Her pretty little upper lip, on which a

Next day after her talk with her mother Natásha expected Bolkónski all
ribbon worn across the shoulder, and the mayor of the city will wear
general who had succeeded Schmidt. In the passage little Kozlóvski was

The Russian army, they say, in its retreat from Smolénsk sought out
Sónya among a minority of women who crowded near the wall, not having
never favorably disposed toward him—would have used it to turn the

loved his wife, she died, but that was not enough: he wanted to bind
From the direction of Olmütz in front of them, a group was seen
to say more in the presence of a stranger.

and amuse themselves as girls of thirteen and fourteen do who are
immediately fell asleep.
society world welcomed him gladly, because he was rich, distinguished, a


“Yes,” returned Nicholas. “You’re not cold?”
exist), nor did he see an advanced post of the Russian army, but while
of constraint or self-reproach on account of his outburst that morning,
“And have you been here long?” Pierre asked as he munched the last of
once, to embrace the man she loved, to speak and hear from him words of

expression which was never to be seen on it in a drawing room. His eyes
    CHAPTER VIII
Lorrain considered.
simple, while what they proposed was so complicated and clever, that
Despite news of the capture of the flèches, Napoleon saw that this was
with a trembling voice and some difficulty in utterance due to his
understood what had happened to him two days before. In his words, his
after all impossible to express all one thinks; and that he had never
wolf, who, increasing her speed, bounded on in the same direction along
“What is your petition?” asked Arakchéev.
which on that day wore an invariable look of solemn festivity.

the carts with the wounded had moved out of the yard.
The soldiers of Dessaix’s division advancing against the flèches could

abandonment of Smolénsk to the enemy. It is pitiable and sad, and
courier from Petersburg brings a letter from the sovereign which does
her fan an old gentleman sitting not far from her, then to lean over to
All the faces bore the same expression of excitement and enthusiasm. A
“Well, this is strange! Do you suppose I... who could think?... I know
Vladímirovich Bezúkhov, Countess Rostóva sat for a long time all

followed her on tiptoe. She did not notice him.

Balashëv took out the packet containing the Emperor’s letter and laid it
order must be given him at once, that instant. And the order to retreat
I, the daughter of Prince Nicholas Bolkónski, asked General Rameau for
The tactical rule that an army should act in masses when attacking, and
ecstatic cries.
concealed depression on the faces around him and heard reports of the
of us. Besides, I want to go very much and certainly will go, so don’t
expression. This quivering of his left leg was a thing Napoleon was
contemptuous look that showed itself on his face.
quite mistaken if you reckon me or my mother among such people. We are
did not listen.
Perhaps she lacks egotism, I don’t know, but from her is taken away, and
possible. Pétya could not return unless his regiment did so or unless
Dans un moment je suis à vous,” * he said, answering someone who
now was evidently ready with a joke. “Whether tomorrow brings
everything from society and giving nothing in return. You have become
the table, searched everywhere, and stood still in the middle of the

adroitness and Italian play-acting! Do you know the tale about him and
my place,” she thought as she went out in the twilight toward the crowd

partner, herself offered to dance the mazurka with Borís. They were the

politeness modestly placed himself at the disposal of the circle in
repeating the same words several times. She could not understand them,
it means... what does it mean?”

blessedness. And such a state of obligatory and irreproachable idleness
I do not wish to utilize the fortunes of war to humiliate an honored
On October 11, 1805, one of the infantry regiments that had just reached
displeased by the substance of his speech, which had even been forgotten
joke, and purposely trying to appear stupider than he really was.
set forth in Section 3 below.

that same face and same look and step, and the same union of majesty and
“Then I’ll have it brought round,” said Rostóv wishing to avoid
so create an impression that the old fellow was not much good and that
minutes to eight, please. We shall make up a rubber. Our general is
was asleep on the sitting-room sofa. The old count was resting in his
understood the whole meaning and importance of this war and of the
A week later Pierre gave his wife full power to control all his estates
nurse is unnatural and harmful. When her next baby was born, despite
bright. Sónya ran away, but Natásha, taking her brother’s arm, led
Mademoiselle Bourienne and the little princess had to own to themselves

anything. If it be God’s will to prove thee in the duties of marriage,
himself an insignificant atom in it) would go through fire and water,
“What did he say? Where to, now? Halt, is it? Did he thank us?” came

recorded in the annals of all the law courts of the world, but which
in.’ I do not know how far he was justified in saying so.”


“Oh! Oh! Oh!”
Pierre was about to reply, but Prince Vasíli interrupted him.
sweeping the street, and everybody within the houses was still asleep,

question that tormented him.
have two footmen behind her carriage, and very big ones. That was her

From the moment Pierre had recognized the appearance of the mysterious
They had not met for nearly half a year and, being at the age when young
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,

in the crowd could be heard saying. “Quite a young fellow too... must
everything, no one can love you more than does
had been spilled on the carpet. They were met by a deacon with a censer

includes also orators, learned men, reformers, philosophers, and poets).


depend on him, and from its lack of success this affair, for the first
with energetic firmness, looking with a changed and inspired expression
retreat from Borodinó to Filí.
now so kind to her. Natásha brightened up and felt almost in love with
appeared. He would carry her away and then sa pauvre mère would appear
“Why should I mind Monsieur Pierre being here?” exclaimed the little
dismounted. He gave the reins to a Cossack, took off and handed over his
sort you want!”

tipsy rage when a man does not know what he is saying. He saw that his

them!” he repeated to himself with inward rapture, feeling that these
the angle became still more acute and we withdrew still farther, because
such a point that they break into the cellars and stores containing army

possible way of dealing with it. The necessity of the conception of

“Mais, ma bonne amie,” said Prince Andrew, “vous devriez au
hares had already half changed their summer coats, the fox cubs were

at them here,” said he. “Don’t go away,” he added, turning to Prince
sway and scatters its last snows and storms with desperate fury. A relay
evidently rigged up by soldiers out of any available materials and
Natásha involuntarily gazed at that neck, those shoulders, and pearls
Alpátych’s cart and that of the innkeeper’s wife, which were slowly


Kutúzov ... recommend Borís to him as adjutant! Then I shall be at
to be allowed to pass as they were blocking the way. As soon as he
When Prince Meshchérski had left, Prince Andrew took Pierre’s arm and
the whole government now!”
while drinking his tea, remained on the top of the brick oven in the
audible.
He wished to explain to Dolgorúkov a plan of attack he had himself
as young Bezúkhov! Yes, I pity him from my heart, and shall try to give

“Would not such a meeting be too trying for him, dear Anna
the street; cockroaches rustled on the table, on the icons, and on

a moment, and, evidently understanding what Rostóv hinted at, seized
easily women can turn from sadness to joy, and how their moods depend

Nicholas too was greatly pleased by “Uncle’s” playing, and
Rostóv turned his horse and galloped back. Four more reports followed
he would have done at that moment had Hélène not fled from the room.
alarm, supposing these words to mean that the young count was displeased

the things to be removed from Boguchárovo. Though the peasants paid
If not it is merely a question of settling where the preliminaries of
longer his nor did he wish for it. He felt that his way of life had now
real power, and that all the others were violations of power.
woman who may belong to anyone—to you too,” said her glance. And at
member of the Hofkriegsrath mildly and attentively.
eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God, are
when footsteps or voices were heard did they look at one another, the
girths.

struck Vereshchágin on the head with the blunt side of his saber.

“No, monseigneur,” he said, suddenly remembering that Davout was a duke.
in the light of the dull autumn evening, mounted men coming toward him.
It was clear and frosty. Above the dirty, ill-lit streets, above the
“Well it won’t be for long. Next summer I’ll take him to Petersburg,”
shed, and on returning stopped by the door to play with a little
intentions of the French!”

Exploding at the word intriguer, Nicholas, raising his voice, told
Pétya came out, peered into the darkness, and went up to the wagons.

army, and that the only way out of the position would be for the Emperor
down, others whispered and laughed. Prince Andrew heard the nickname

forgiving the penitent.
all over with mud and had smeared his face by wiping it with his sleeve.
was such a thing as “landlord’s corn” which was sometimes given to the
at peace, and immediately felt this.
you seen Duport?”
lui, parce qu’il m’a manqué parole.” *

of them forgot what was happening and what was about to happen in the
way and attaching him to himself! What if he gave me a place near him?
Anatole had a passport, an order for post horses, ten thousand rubles


might, and a passionate attraction to him who was the cause of this
first of all to know in what the nation’s life consists.
I know for certain that you won’t marry her.”
farms at which Nicholas might procure horses, recommended to him a horse
“Well, stand us some of your herb vodka, Túshin,” it said.
with regret that there was something lacking in her feeling for young
with the outer man to desire spiritual improvement, I had no cause to
preparing tea. He brought in a boiling samovar. When everything was
dancing that first turn of the waltz.
her trunk had been taken down from its cart, and all the loads were
as they watched their young people executing their newly learned steps,
that answer to Princess Mary which she had been unable to write all
They marched very quickly, without resting, and halted only when the sun
Beaumarchais, and others?
“I did not come here at all to quarrel with you. On the contrary...”

the trees. Denísov, the esaul, and Pétya rode silently, following the
endless chain of causation inevitably demanded by reason, in which each
“I will allow no one to call me a liar!” cried Rostóv. “He told
his amazement had gained him the St. George’s Cross and even given him
Mikháylovna.

and he walked on.
a plot against him which not only fails to harm him but confirms his
produces events, and treat it as their cause. In their exposition, an
In the eyes of the world Pierre was a great gentleman, the rather blind
that she had not intended her flight to bring her so far. Behind her in
room, the inside shutters of which were closed. He was cross with the
not billeted on the inhabitants as is usual in towns but lived in it as
inseparable from power; a character who at every moment of his life
armed peasants and domestic serfs. She sat by the window listening to
Natásha, after she had pulled him down toward her and covered his face
Goliath...” she whispered.

Mary’s happiness.
“What’s the matter? I only congratulated them,” said Zherkóv.
Andrew, “I am only surprised at your opinion of Bonaparte. You
“Who has told them not to capture me these twenty times over? But if



to the review, reaching the field at Olmütz by ten o’clock.
strove toward the infinite, the eternal, and the absolute, and could
“No, leave me alone,” said Princess Mary.
abandoned it and did not welcome the French with bread and salt, nor
to show her fear of Anna Pávlovna. She looked at her niece, as if
of the war. With Pfuel was Wolzogen, who expressed Pfuel’s thoughts in
Métivier with his shock of black hair, and the prince in his dressing
but Kutúzov accompanied that column. He well knew that nothing but
the broken sealing wax and pens.
fire glowed—the first of those that were beginning in Moscow. To the

“Yes, that was happiness,” she then said in her quiet voice with its
take him away from surroundings in which, protected from all the
“Oh, Mamma, how is it you don’t understand that the Holy Father, who has
in society or money, which he borrowed from anyone and everyone and
to the first squadron?”
supplied an occupation and consolation to the family circle? How would
“Pass on, pass on!” the captain reiterated, frowning sternly, and
Then when the whole field was covered with smoke, two divisions,
Highness knows you and will receive you graciously. That’s what you must
had been drawn up on the supposition that Moscow was still in our hands,
they’re sorry for it afterwards. I don’t like that.”
and, hastily passing between the rows, came toward their box. When he
bring her share and a husband his. I have my position in the service,
certain. I write all this to you, dear friend, only to convince you
at the ball.
the day before....”
round-shouldered man in the undress uniform of a civilian official, with

The cause of the confusion was that while the Austrian cavalry was


“Fine fellows!” said Rostóv laughing. “Is there any hay here?”
suite. “But, gentlemen...”
laughed. “Véra’s spiteful; never mind her! And all will come right
so near him, to look at him like that, to be so sure he admired her, and
“Why, I’ve not said anything! I only say that I’ll certainly go with
he seemed even fonder than of his aunt, and clung to them quietly and

convalescence. Dólokhov lay ill at his mother’s who loved him
own injustice toward her.
Puckering up his face though smiling, and showing his short strong

“That is for me to know, but not for you to ask,” shouted Rostopchín.

we’re getting it still worse,” said Nesvítski. “But sit down and
Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in

Pierre, having decided that until he had carried out his design he would
hurrah!” Pétya stood on tiptoe and pushed and pinched, but could see

Just so it now seems as if we have only to admit the law of

already taken were perishing of hunger.


It was plain that this “well?” referred to much that they both

writing—he was auditing accounts. Better quarters could have been
difference, that it was livelier in the towns in consequence of the
    CHAPTER XVII

very idea of marrying for money is repugnant to me.”
Finding himself in the company of Napoleon, whose identity he had easily
Bourienne flushed, and gave the princess a frightened look.
Pierre had evoked the passionate affection of the Italian merely by
provender which might have saved it from starvation, disintegrated and
the life and activity of the Godfreys and the Louis-es and their ladies?
the hussar officers.
our transgressions and iniquities! Create in us a clean heart and renew
a visit. “I am starting on a journey of inspection, and of course I
    CHAPTER XX

consider that this suited them, since death by hunger and cold awaited
please. That is all I ask. Monsieur Pierre, you say.... That’s all I
looking at her red face and chin (nearly always powdered), her moist
watch and its hands point to ten, I hear the bells of the neighboring
since the death of Joseph Bazdéev was now even gloomier.

“I, I... I’ll go with you!” cried Pétya.
Rostóv did not speak.
and Anatole met in the conservatory.
“Yes, I think so,” said Princess Mary with a smile. “Write to her
On entering the ballroom the regular hum of voices, footsteps, and
Pierre. “What of it? It’s the truth!” and he himself smiled his
“Thirdly,” Pierre continued without listening to him, “you must never
they thought were mere phrases) about a “golden bridge,” about the
the end of her life to love the man with whom she had fallen in love for
“Oh, dear! Well then, wait. That’s right, Sónya.”
Pierre inquired what was being said about leaving, and the corporal told
the sound of voices and the shouts of command. The whole air reeked with
Prince Andrew looked Anna Pávlovna straight in the face with a


fresh conflict to finish the enemy and did this not to deceive anyone,

society by his agility. His particularly free manner of dancing even
Borodinó for more than a month had recently died in the Rostóvs’ house

and he would marry her. So her future shaped itself in Mademoiselle

labor but should die of it in a week, so he could not stand my physical
sides of the herd.” So say the third class of historians who regard all
out everything two days ago. That’s what other people do. It’s only
an old friend.
likely the doctor.”
eagle, began to address the assembled people,” were read and discussed,
Moscow without a battle?” Kutúzov replied: “And I shall not abandon
thought, “I must remain free.”
visitors, usually spoken of as “a man of great merit,” having described
“And where is Lise?” he asked, answering her question only by a
abandoning their comrades who were farther behind. Then for three days
than ours, and he is always advising the Minister. I am not merely civil
pointing to the Cossack.
bridge is taken! But what is best of all,” he went on, his excitement
The little princess during the whole discussion and the rest of

hussars formed line for roll call, kept things in order, groomed their
last campaign, Prince Peter Ivánovich Bagratión!” and again his blue
became silent. The raft had long since stopped and only the waves of the

I myself have experienced ... and so ... because ... No, excuse me!
“What year did you enter the service?” he asked with that affectation
    “Qui eut le triple talent,
him go.

“That is just why I do not begin, sire,” said Kutúzov in a
self-confident smile. “What I can’t understand,” he went on, “is that

great, but so are his ancestors, his brothers, his stepsons, and his
not. The regiments would not be what they are if the would-be advisers
embraced and kissed her.




to Bennigsen (who reported separately to the Emperor) the following
insignificance beside her in the spiritual world, and rejoiced all the
and drew out his pocketbook.
at a soldier in the ranks of the third company in a greatcoat of bluish
by her thoughts, was crossing herself for the last time before leaving
“I don’t understand. What’s it all about?”
morning had passed off safely. After admitting the doctor, Princess Mary
“But how is it the doctor from Moscow is not here yet?” said the
“Yes, and for me nothing else is serious. All the time in Petersburg I
then the officers, and after them with excited faces, pressing on one
trodden down by the cattle, and against the pale-yellow stubble of the
“Go your way and God be with you. I know your path is the path of
Pávlovna, not yet seeing all those whom she wanted in her drawing room,
simple and natural. “And she is such a grande dame, so kind, and
with a staff, a wallet on her back, along the dusty road, directing her
latter.
“Oh, how strange you are with that mustache and those eyebrows!...
“What is it? Who is it? What is it for?” he kept asking.
whom should I say that? Either to a Power indefinable, incomprehensible,
Túshin’s guns had been intended to cannonade the valley, he was
carrying Pétya with it, streamed forward into the Krémlin Square which
into her radiant smile.
“But joking apart,” said Prince Andrew, “do you really think the
Prince Nicholas frowned, but said nothing.
of command.

questions they put to him, but did not consider who was listening to his
she had seen.
Highness,” said the tall fellow with a triumphant smile on his lips and
“Who are you?” asked the interpreter in poor Russian. “You must answer
Besides these Russians and foreigners who propounded new and unexpected
wished both to rebuke him (for daring to speak as he had done of a man

not the same, not at all the same, as what had happened in his former
young Nicholas Rostóv, who with his enthusiasm could not bear to remain

“Your regiment fulfilled its duty honorably,” said Napoleon.
repeating in a low voice the same words several times over.
that on receiving news of the defeat some would simply not believe it,
“Oh yes, and what do the Masonic brothers say about war? How would they
the Emperor dined—looking in at the palace windows, expecting he knew

soldiers would violate my father’s newly dug grave to steal his crosses
friendly words to officers he had known in the Turkish war, sometimes
drove past was an acquaintance of the Rostóvs’, and Pétya thought of
of this class, by mutually destroying one another’s positions, destroy
gentlemen have gone out, and his Serene Highness himself rode past long
When Gabriel came to inform her that the men who had come had run
    * “Countess, there is mercy for every sin.”
“I will the bridge fire,” he said in a solemn tone as if to announce
smile. Freemasonry is not a religious ceremonial sect, as I thought
wagons, drawn by French horses and by saddled Cossack horses that had

If we admit that human life can be ruled by reason, the possibility of
maneuvers or plans, again began running along the beaten track, neither

built in order to have a nook of one’s own in which to be quiet. And

therefore so long as not all the conditions influencing men are defined,
politeness and to start conversation, they asked him a few questions
fear would prevent her understanding any of her father’s further
But Borís again interrupted him.
path of virtue,” said the Mason.
expecting two very interesting men tonight, le Vicomte de Mortemart, who
the Russian army in its retreat from Vílna to Moscow lost in the various
“Now thou hast seen the lesser light,” uttered a voice. Then the


no! Good-by, good-by!” he muttered. “It’s an awful time!” and dropping
of the impending moment that Pierre had seen on the faces at the foot of
At that moment Nicholas noticed the presence of his nephew. His face
ratify it; but it is only a trick. March on, destroy the Russian
they hope to recover. During the last few days many of the men have been
a room with a lamp dimly lit before the icon Theodosia was talking of
only change being that the words “Father Kámenski” were replaced by

And again in a futile struggle with reality her mother, refusing to
punishes thee,’ I shall say,” thought he, imagining what he would say
everything has been taken away. Sometimes I am dreadfully sorry for her.

“Done for!” repeated Dólokhov as if the utterance of these words

“What? What? Why? Don’t ask me,” said Pierre, and looked round at
undressed, ran off to clear the men out of the pond.
victims of the plague.
did not understand them.
in their flight and spread out over a distance of twenty-four hours. In

smile on his lips. “What a pity I’ve missed Uncle! What a nice old
with anything in regard to her; and that always will be so in whatever
regenerate, purify, and elevate me. But you don’t understand it.”
far behindhand in many things that had they begun to converse in her
miles away from the French. At Grunth also some apprehension and alarm
The Tsar stopped a few minutes in front of the hussars as if undecided.
wrote, “the matter was not then so definitely settled as it is now.
usual; but she, stepping up to him, stopped, breathing heavily, her arms
time-worn face) and boldly began to expound his plan of cutting the
left to be victimized by an old man who has outlived his wits. The old
days.”
of the firing and shouting. But the firing and shouting did not relate

The sun had risen brightly and its slanting rays struck straight into
what was happening there; he was entirely absorbed in watching this fire
“You mean to imply that I have nothing to eat out of.... On the
“Don’t come in,” she said to the old count who was following her.
idea of the means by which our holy Order will help you to reach your
who committed the action, and seems more free and less inevitable to one
driver who had known Dólokhov and Anatole some six years and had given

his riding whip.
‘You are perishing because of me, Daddy,’ he says. ‘It’s quite true,

Pierre gradually began to recover himself and looked about at the room
“Why don’t you speak, cousin?” suddenly shrieked the princess so
analyzing the properties of manure, before entering into the debit and

the campfire listening to the talk.
eighty thousand as well. Yes, yes! Kiss me.”
women’s gloves, he said: “Dear brother, these woman’s gloves are

patriotic fervor as not merely secondary but quite irrelevant and
that he and all the other prisoners were exactly the ones they wanted

him except Platón Karatáev, who always remained in his mind a most
four thousand, not more, and not even that; but even were they ten


During the third night the countess kept very quiet for a few minutes,
But Borís spoke distinctly, clearly, and dryly, looking straight into

at the Slobóda Palace he had been continuously under its influence, but
tell the truth.
contrary alike to strategic and diplomatic considerations, ordered an
there is little need for discussion. The Emperor has deigned to summon
face became suddenly transformed. It was as if a light had been kindled
Having released Mavrúshka, Natásha crossed the dancing hall and went
herself, and clung to her.
dismount and stab the wolf, when she suddenly thrust her head up from
what happiness it would be to die—not in saving the Emperor’s life
that army: a feeling of self-forgetfulness, a proud consciousness of
that showed that his father’s foibles did not prevent his son from
to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that
bring him to thee, could take him by the hand and show him to thee. But
everyone’s ear tingling. By that shriek she expressed what the others

possible.”
They were again silent.
parents who have petted their children from babyhood, but which Prince
Prince Andrew, taking advantage of the Emperor’s permission, accompanied
Soon after this the children came in to say good night. They kissed

Davout turned away. With an unexpected reverberation in his voice Pierre
of this movement lay, for not much mental effort was needed to see that
Mamma has sent for me to go and dine at the Apráksins’. Read the
and involuntarily noticed the carefully washed seams of the scar near
Willarski was a married man with a family, busy with his family affairs,
idea. She consulted a Russian priest as to the possibility of divorce
a young soldier with a snub nose. His pale waxen face was still freckled
and runs at once to the arms of its mother or nurse to have the aching

of moderation in judgment, hated him cordially from reports of his

that her question, following his mention of freedom, ascribed to his
go into that. But consider the position in which you are placing her and
the more manifest the law of inevitability.

sleepless activity after his previous apathy, could not bring herself to

possible, inevitable, and very near.
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
knew that Dron, who had acquired property and was hated by the commune,
conversation. Prince Bolkónski listened as a presiding judge receives a
bound by family, official, or business duties, seem certainly less free

spectacles.
Gerásim, being a servant who in his time had seen many strange things,

In the dining room, which like all the rooms in the house was

over,” Anna Pávlovna continued. “The sovereigns will not be able to
carefully wrote twenty-one.
happiness.

    * A kind of entrenchment.
conversation to take a fresh turn. But the abbé, though he evidently
flew past. The hare had squatted. Again the beautiful Erzá reached him,
“I have heard of you, my dear sir,” continued the stranger, “and

with me and we’ll arrange a game of cards. Of course you know Dmítri
Kutúzov by his willingness and accuracy in work. Not having found
the way they had spoken during the council, communicated something to
scarcely perceptible smile. “He thinks there’s no government! How can
There was not a room to be had at the inn, they were all occupied.
the general confusion. The men of this party had both the quality

Natásha.
yet a young woman. Escaping from her father she ran to hide her flushed
ordered the horses to be harnessed. Only those things he always kept
At that moment this news had only one significance for both of them.
else—formed by the men in the battery. His first unconscious feeling of
“God of our fathers! Remember Thy bounteous mercy and loving-kindness

in Anísya and in Anísya’s father and mother and aunt, and in every
And having thus demolished the young man, Anna Pávlovna turned to
prince, stepping on his heels, paced up and down his study and sent
houses—in any case a troublesome and dangerous thing to do), arson
enemy soldiers occupying houses they did not own. Even if there was any

and her son. She had opportunities of sending her letters to the Grand

fulfill Thy will?” And scarcely had she put that question than God
serf.
ambassadors to compliment the usurper.”

“By purifying and regenerating our members we try, thirdly, to improve
called up from ten villages around and they carted for twenty days and
bed.

lad,” he said, addressing his favorite soldier. “And where is the
time before the dragoons could extricate the bleeding youth, beaten
    CHAPTER VII
But afterwards, when she saw her father and especially little Koko
satisfaction at the sight of all this movement in their drawing room,
Biographical historians and historians of separate nations understand
father to fits of bloodthirsty rage. And when after Pierre’s
the wolf, seizing her by the ears. Nicholas was about to stab her, but
lifted is no longer the same as the arm I now refrain from lifting,


disturbed.


“Can we arm ourselves against our teachers and divinities? Look at
Rostóv felt that, under the influence of the warm rays of love, that

“Well, good-by, Theodore. Thank you for everything and farewell!” said


because he had said she was “charmante.”
And she burst into sobs with the despairing vehemence with which people
words but could not distinguish them. The din of many voices was too

and nodding to right and left as casually and good-naturedly as if he
now replaced by Marshal Junot’s enormous baggage train, convoyed by
killed them so well and was so cunning and wise that when he returned to
the strict performance of these forms without troubling about their
all rules of logic, without premises, deductions, or conclusions, and in
his head.
the left was the dying embers of a campfire, that the man who had come
anger but was still seeking an object on which to vent it. “Here is
laws of its divine Saviour, Who preached love and forgiveness of
saw Denísov coming home. Denísov was a small man with a red face,


but remarked that besides these changes it would be necessary to go into


her father, noticed his silence, and was struck by the fact that her
recalled did not arouse the same poetic feeling as they experienced. She

understood that some fool there is doing things all wrong but that
gazed at him questioningly: would he approve or disapprove of her

only a withdrawal beyond the Niemen was now demanded. Napoleon turned
thrashing for letting a private traveler have the courier horses.
     make it a barque of Charon.”
meaning, that several times she was on the point of abandoning
people—businessmen, relations, and acquaintances alike—were all

who amuses himself in this sensible manner! And he was said to be so
that Pierre could no longer see the reddish-yellow face with its gray
when Prince Andrew went to him and, trying to rouse him, began to
seconds he stood not moving from the spot or realizing the situation.
“I am thinking of what you have told me,” answered Princess Mary.
whether to abandon Moscow or defend it; whereas, with the Russian army
eyes.

told her of external social events and of the people who had formed
CHAPTER XI
come off their heads.
“Ah, but you are a crusty fellow, friend!” said the count.
the best time of the year for the chase. The hounds of that ardent young
fighting under the command of a genius, in two—or three-line formation,
that is, you want to raise him” (pointing to a peasant who passed by
himself went to the nursery.
Natásha looked at Sónya with wide-open eyes as if she could not grasp
“But shan’t we have to accept battle?” remarked Prince Andrew.
“Hélène, I have a word to say to you,” and he would lead her
have come about. Don’t say it—I know. No, do tell me!” and she
CHAPTER IX
“Finished, finished!” little Natásha’s gleeful yell rose above them all.
whole army.”

Pierre more strongly with the solemnity and importance of the moment
“What now?” the officer asked with a cold look as if not recognizing
among the men and a dispute about something important and clever. Now
Freedom not limited by anything is the essence of life, in man’s
to sit down and make themselves at home, and then went out of the room.
totally different from Armfeldt’s or Pfuel’s plan of campaign. In answer
indicated, holding away with one finger the coat collar which chafed
himself knowing whom to or what about. “That’s it, come on! That’s
head and an army of fifteen thousand men has been ordered to blow up

find place in her? But she was very happy. As they were nearing home she
“They can’t hold all that line. It’s impossible. I will undertake to
The princess rose quickly to meet him and held out her hand.
“What can it be?” he thought. “The enemy in the rear of our army?

some reason everyone called “The King of Rome.”
They were bivouacking. Denísov and Rostóv were living in an earth hut,
off her husband’s face, lest he should wake up.
“He was a very clever man but has now grown quite feeble, as your honor
son,” which said nothing of when he would return. In 1810 he received
CHAPTER XII
subjugates a kingdom and an entire nation of several millions, all
Everyone understands that this illogical reply is an irrefutable
seen at Smolénsk the state in which Russian towns were left to him, and

very well be that he was not sitting on a wagon but on a terribly high
where.
matters unrelated to his past interests, and he seized on these the more
you going?” she asked.
by the clouds, over the roofs of the street opposite, on the
some garments from under them.
He tried several times to join in the conversation, but his remarks were
When the mutton and an omelet had been served and a samovar and vodka
intimate, came to him with the professions of friendship and intimacy

When the troops reached their night’s halting place on the eighth of
of affairs?” concluded his father. “But it troubles me. I don’t
analogy, and passed too boldly, it seemed to Prince Andrew, from one
Emperor, would stubbornly insist on the correctness or falsity of some


big reddish belly. She ran without hurry, evidently feeling sure that no

look into the matter can easily convince himself.

Pávlovna whispered the next words in advance, like an old woman
bell clanging. The side horses, pressing against the shafts of the
Her fate was decided and happily decided. But what her father had said
a red face was dancing the trepák with much spirit and agility.
their coming to Petersburg, and the likeness between Natásha and Prince
A few days before his departure a special thanksgiving, at which
had known him before, and despite his abhorrence of the civil service,
At ten in the morning of the second of September this weather still

and understood the meaning of the rebuke and despair in that protracted

day, and leave my lassies with you.”
Alpátych named others, but they too, according to Dron, had no horses

the charcoal.

acquaintance of many persons who might prove useful to him, and by
her look, but her exclamations and the brief questions she put, showed
which she received indications)—before parting with her money insisted
princess’ room, a carriage containing Pierre (who had been sent for)
had undressed, but without washing off the cork mustaches, they sat a
to the French camp with me? I have brought a spare uniform.”

Pierre approached Prince Andrew and was about to start a conversation
certainly should not, speak like that,” their glances seemed to say.
over, the adjutant he had seen the previous day ceremoniously informed
and all he came across in the history of more recent warfare seemed to

nor is the air in which I lifted it the same that now surrounds me. The
day, but he did not come. On the second and third day it was the same.
rubbing his bald head and angrily pulling back toward him the little

Bolkónski, very modestly without once mentioning himself, described the
Rostóv at a gliding gait and continued to impart his views. He said
his fieldglass. A little behind them Nesvítski, who had been sent to
The intrusion of Pierre’s nonmilitary figure in a white hat made an

Rostopchín had returned to Moscow. After supper he lay down on a sofa



The heaviness of his head and chest reminded him of the possibility
it. Were it not free it could not be limited. A man’s will seems to him
such and such people wrote such and such books? Of the immense number of
“Yes, just the same. Though I don’t know what your opinion will
laughed loudly at it.

innovations in his fatherland—now that he seemed to possess the utmost
She lay for a long time in that position.
of the prince’s attacks and ridicule. Whatever was spoken of he would
lay more than on all the others who took part in it. Never to the end
the night.

in the house on the Povarskáya rose before him with such vividness,

preserve his gravity.
different from herself, who yet was able to understand all that was

must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
the same way, bent double, in a pool of blood at the edge of the earth
groom, a daring horseman and keen rider to hounds. Before the hunt, by
should hardly be able to climb onto a horse.”
were in his place...”
He went out into the street: two men were running past toward the
the devil moves it. Another man says the locomotive moves because its
Prince Andrew during the battle had been in attendance on the Austrian
should take part in an argument between the general and the colonel on
Europe.
her.
appalled at the thought of being left in the hands of the French.
their guns, were running toward him. He also saw French infantry
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
“I rescued such a lot of them!” said Nicholas.
flattering—quite simply and naturally.
looking wrathfully around as if he were abusing someone, as if they

conversation upon Pierre’s matrimonial affairs, by way of fraternal
departure of the inhabitants. If one accepts this twofold aim all
only become known, but people had grown accustomed to him and accepted
and hills in the distance—and despite the fact that the inhabitants
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing
extraordinary may happen to one that honor and dishonor will be all the

renounced your former convictions—do you believe in God?”
CHAPTER VII
and shot him in the fleshy part of the back. That wound (which Tíkhon
“And Nicholas? Where is he? By the Lyádov upland, isn’t he?”
reflections of real life, went on in its old way and made it hard,
to be separated....”
eh? Yes, a nice stepmother little Nicholas will have! Write and tell him

letter to the Emperor begging him to recognize Pierre as legitimate, it
of preparations for leaving Moscow, all confirmed the supposition that
who always solved questions that seemed to him perplexing by deciding
daughter’s head with all her strength. Then she turned toward her
the German landlord.
entered the anteroom I heard Andrúsha’s peals of laughter and that meant

given it up.”

“But look here, brothers, there’s another fire!” remarked an orderly.
a sense of disgust the minutest details of this humiliating scene he
before him, that he was out of humor, as was sometimes the case when
“Gentlemen, I’ll do anything. No one shall hear a word from me,”
persons, briskly turning a shoulder to the orator at the end of a
my broken and barked fingers just where they have grown, whether from my

he met Nesvítski, with whom he shared a room, and the wag Zherkóv;
stout major who was walking back along the street past the row of carts.
do you remain silent when heaven knows who permits herself to
Mamma too! Only you need not have bought me this,” she added, unable to

the stewards (there were semiliterate foremen among them) listened with
he was preparing fireworks to let off that night.
commander of all the forces, and the Emperor did not assume that
reflections. Better die a thousand times than risk receiving an unkind

bast were hanging on the broken and withered branch of a magnolia.
how is that?” said different voices.
Oldenburg,” said Prince Bolkónski. “He shifts the Dukes about as
has already refused Bolkónski—she sent a letter to Princess Mary
formerly when he did not grasp what lay before him or was said to
severely, saying that he ought to be shot. General Bagovút, a fighting
The count was about to say something, but evidently restrained himself.
at once.
severity with which marauding and insubordination were now regarded,
and Anna Mikháylovna (who found it necessary to accompany him) was
Michaud respectfully delivered the message Kutúzov had entrusted to him,


A week before the French had had boot leather and linen issued to them,
wake the captain first.”
snuffbox while trying to hear what was being said at the other table.
The Pávlograd regiment had had only two men wounded in action, but had
and baggage trains started.



“I know your heart,” repeated the prince. “I value your friendship
he gave me a notebook, the one I am now writing in and in which I will


because it involved him in too much expense, but still his affairs
foolish as soon as he uttered them, while on the contrary Hippolyte’s

happening—what did it matter to him whether Rostopchín attributed the
was covered with perspiration. Pierre was hungry and shared the dinner
often occurs when receiving friends for the first time in one’s own
the thought occurred that should he recover their former engagement
was putting up there, but just when Pierre arrived he was not in and
The whole battle consisted in what Orlóv-Denísov’s Cossacks had done:
self-satisfaction; but she forced Borís to say all that is said on such
believe me, wouldn’t drink their vodka! ‘It’s not the day for that!’


daughter is so young, and I thought that, as my son’s friend, you
moment and because many of the adjutants did not go to the actual place
along, holding him up under the arms, and he screamed. When they got

severe gaze straight on Pierre’s face.
came naturally to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.
between his effort to arrange his life by his own sense of justice, and

pistols, and at the word thwee begin to advance.
hands. “Just fancy, he didn’t let me win a single cahd, not one

notwithstanding this, Borís embraced him in a quiet, friendly way and
The Mason smiled with his gentle fatherly smile.
recollections.” Prince Vasíli sighed. “Yes, yes, my boy. And my

wished to make some suggestion. But Prince Vasíli interrupted him in
a chicken anywhere. Anísya Fëdorovna left the room.
rank and importance, who was the first to arrive at her reception. Anna
course of events, and he can see them and grasp their significance,
and that the Italian’s cure consisted in removing such inconvenience;
busy among the provisions, and in the yards unlocking or breaking open
terrible storm. He repeated every injustice he had ever inflicted on
fame, with the girl at the window, the oak, and woman’s beauty
CHAPTER XXI

bench and put it beside the table. Ermólov, Kaysárov, and Toll, who had
body. Drowsiness was irresistibly mastering him, but he kept awake by
his gestures, that Pierre, unconsciously smiling in response to the
on in his usual tone of indifference.
the table in a merry mood, sitting down now by one, now by another, of
    CHAPTER I
ought to be, now he fancied it was only something in his own eyes. His

headlong speed with no time to consider what this movement might lead
with the self-destruction toward which—ever dissecting and dissecting
their woman’s way! I am glad to have her. Sit down and talk. About
Véra with guilty, happy faces.
During the three days preceding the occupation of Moscow the whole
the Petersburg world this sad side of the affair again involuntarily

Moscow. Wait for me!”
“I have no betrothed: I have refused him!” cried Natásha.


“Yes, that’s me!” she seemed to say, answering the rapt gaze with

gazing by artificial light through a glass. Now he suddenly saw those


seriously. It’s no joke, this plot you’ve hatched.”
Denísov’s favorite barcarolle. Natásha was preparing to sing.
still kept awake at night so as not to miss the proper time when the
that the French were not all captured or destroyed when our three armies
“I can’t tell you how much I have lived through since then. I hardly
latest fashion, with extremely pointed toes and small silver spurs,
excellency. Shall I go with some of my hussars to see?” replied
Another five days passed, and then the young Prince Nicholas Andréevich
brunette with a tender look in her eyes which were veiled by long
She returned to the garden and sat down on the grass at the foot of the
fortune. Suddenly he heard a familiar voice repeating something to him a
my rupture with the Brothers. Joseph Alexéevich, having remained silent
to come to his study.
had not been time to move. The Emperor, surrounded by his suite
you, but we’ll see what will happen. Buonaparte has become a great
“you’ve got it at last.”
number of those conditions is as infinite as the infinity of space. And
our thoughts to the second, Bonaparte. But as it turns out, just at
maids.


society. Beside him stood a lad of nineteen, also a wounded officer of
“The herd goes in that direction because the animal in front leads

another as form and content, no conception of life is possible.
“That’s right, hit him on the snout—on his snout! Like this, we
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity

because the ball became livelier after his departure. For one of the


himself.
me, the commander in chief, than to him.”
That couch was dreadful to him, probably because of the oppressive
head sink over his plate. “He is old and feeble, and I dare to condemn
I don’t want any of them! And what are they doing here?” she thought.
“No, if I hadn’t thought of it being a treasure,” said Rostóv,
that instant the trooper Nikítenko, who was galloping ahead, shot away

put those who did not take an active part in the affairs of the lodges


former strength, and at the same time felt that she loved Kurágin. She
platform of the cannon, and reproached those others (whoever they might
murder, and so on?
described it, she felt something like a fresh breeze wafted into her
She looked timidly at her brother.
another. I’d sleep a bit and then again go and kiss the relics, and
    CHAPTER XI
of an important personage whose complete confidence he enjoyed, and he
The conversation flagged, and the soldiers began settling down to sleep.
way), the historians forget that nothing could have saved his army, for

as the French; that is to say, under conditions in which it was not
Napoleon might fight him with his own weapon and remain in Moscow
same way. When did it happen and what has happened? I am well and strong

mistakes even at the cost of diminishing the glory due to the Russian
into her arms, and through the gathering mists, foreseeing the brilliant



nothing but them.

Denísov rose and began gesticulating as he explained his plan to
“Yes, yes, do that,” he replied to various proposals. “Yes, yes: go,
the greater or lesser desire to fight and to face danger. Only then,
“But did you notice, it says, ‘for consultation’?” said Pierre.
The French attributed the Fire of Moscow au patriotisme féroce de
“Uncle’s” cap just visible above the bush on his right.
“A likely thing, killing a fox our dogs had hunted! And it was my gray

“Have you any news of the Rostóvs?” she asked, to change the

large estate, Boguchárovo, about twenty-five miles from Bald Hills.
The priest’s wife, flushing rosy red, caught up the dish she had after
to please the Emperor, he alone—incurring thereby the Emperor’s
respectfully to her, and seated herself in an armchair beside the

on, turning to Dólokhov. “Will you believe it, Theodore Iványch,
    CHAPTER I
it. Your fellow countrymen are emerging boldly from their hiding places
he would expand his chest, raise his head, and rejoice at his good
regarding all arguments as nonsense in comparison with that smile.
last succeeded in justifying himself. “There are your thousand-ruble
As he drove through the streets past the houses that had been burned
who had risen and was sniffing in the dark passage.

“What is bad, Father?”
whence—a stern note of which all are conscious sounds in the moral
horses got ready for the princess’ carriages and eighteen carts for
shining with emotion, “that my dynasty should cease to reign on the


changing his tone or attitude, “it must seem to you that everyone is
before the master arrived. Everywhere preparations were made not for
“Here. What lightning!” they called to one another.
heard distinctly.
“I know! I know that feeling,” said Nicholas. “But I mustn’t go
is not abashed now, so she cannot be a bad woman!” He had often begun
“I hear you have given orders to harness,” she cried, panting (she
    CHAPTER XII
“There now! It’s true that all you women are crybabies,” remarked
had produced a good epigram, a fresh one that would be repeated. His

The third interruption came when Prince Andrew was finishing his

through the mud. He did not even trouble to find out where Denísov had
strange feeling of perplexity and fear, her evenings and dinner parties,



could not understand them however much she might think about them. She
from the court arrived, and on the first of May, Denísov was ordered
on his journey, looking round at the fields of yellow rye and the
“Don’t tease! Well, and what has been decided about Novosíltsev’s
Before he was thoroughly awake next morning everybody had already left
During the winter Prince Andrew had come to Bald Hills and had been gay,

Society. Once or twice Pierre was carried away and began to speak of
going to the battle (she knew he enjoyed the thought of the impending
Vasíli Dmítrich Denísov? My neighbor,” he added, when he heard
his foreign uniform on an hussar packhorse and looked anxiously about
decently and with dignity, and the deacon is the same. What holiness is
“I have seen the princess,” she replied. “I heard that they were
love such as filled her heart. While she sat in the carriage beside her
the princess and Dessalles with the little prince to Boguchárovo and
everyone, the tutors and governesses made their bows, and they went out.
everyone believed in the merit and usefulness of his deed, and he had

have been a merchant’s son. What men!... and they say he’s not the right
When Morel had drunk some vodka and finished his bowl of porridge he
with a clever face and sharply projecting jaw which, without spoiling

“But with such ideas what motive have you for living? One would sit
round-shouldered Captain Túshin, stumbling over the tail of the gun
Sónya and Natásha slept in the sitting room without undressing.

were passing that morning, then into the distance across the river, then
smile.
By “what was due from the Ryazán estate” Prince Vasíli meant
on his hand stooped, kissed them, and replied to their inquiries. But
at Anna Pávlovna’s, that it would be difficult to get rid of Anna
extending over his cheeks, bent low over the face of his hearer, as was
be they what they might.
that they would speak nothing but Russian and that those who made a
to him senseless, he understood and was not surprised at it.
wanted most was to convey his thought to others just as he himself
Dólokhov’s appearance amazed Pétya by its simplicity.

retreating troops, with many different feelings.
it. The hatred and contempt of the crowd punish such men for discerning
was thinking of. Yes, Na-tásha, sabretache, oh, yes, yes! That’s
Bolkónski. Well, I had a talk with him.... He took it into his head to
awkward silence that ensued, that insufficiently patriotic person

window sill.
that of Prince Andrew.
which were to be the first to descend the heights to attack the French
nothing but harmed nobody and was a first-rate, good-natured fellow. But

an entreaty, a threat, and above all conviction that she would herself

Pierre stepped out of his carriage and, passing the toiling militiamen,


called Berthier.
been shown in and out of the minister’s room by the adjutant on duty,
from within.

another group where Bilíbin was talking about the Austrians: having
went, with the smile of a coquettish girl, which at one time probably
so alien to us.
moving toward the door. Borís, fluttering as if he had not had time to
confusion and silence, but was afraid even to think about it.


which Count Lauriston informs me, as a reason for this aggression, that
(2) However much we approximate the time of judgment to the time of the
waiting to hear whether he would say anything more. But Kutúzov, with

appointed time.
this party were those who had demanded an advance from Vílna into Poland


histories of culture, to which all general histories tend more and more

of the prisoners said a word.

with Kutúzov’s cantata, laid one before Pierre as one of the
herself disinterestedly at the head of an alliance having for its object
Mademoiselle Bourienne in her arms and gently stroking her hair. The
“The servants say he is still the same.”
During one of these pauses Kutúzov heaved a deep sigh as if preparing to
were intent on serving that husband and family, she could not imagine
just returned from abroad where he had been educated, and this was his


“No, Peter Nikoláevich; I only want to show that in the cavalry
she loved him she need only say the word yes, and no human power could
with Uvárov’s cavalry at midday, and on the other side, beyond Utítsa,

whole army! “I needn’t have been in such a hurry to pray about today,

“So it is all finished!” he thought. “And how has it all happened?
he had seen at Bald Hills when he passed through it.

had happened the evening before? “Yes, yes! All that has happened, and

Again all was silent, but Prince Andrew knew she was still sitting
maneuvers, and his profound plans which guided the army, as well as the
face probably looked very terrible, for the officer said something in

every word and movement was described with ecstasy.
never laughed without a sound of tears in her laughter. She could not
“Leave it, Vasílich will put it away. It’s not wanted.”

Kashmir—that’s settled. Vive l’Empereur! Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah! The
“No, but I have been in love a thousand times and shall fall in
“I was there,” said Rostóv angrily, as if intending to insult the
the guests. To each of them he made some careless and agreeable remark
“Commander in Chief Kutúzov?” said the newly arrived general
difficulty.

The handsome young soldier who had brought the wood, setting his arms
were, the latter would probably have left him, but the man’s animated
of the highroad (from Moscow to Smolénsk) and almost at a right angle

Ryazán estate or to the one near Moscow.”
his study telling her that if she did not go away it was all the same
“I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of the

Nikoláevich’s, to exchange the gossip of the town.
“Oh, my bower, oh, my bower...!”
men being free and equal. This caused people all over France to begin

sorry to leave the regiment. If I decline the honor of being with you,
into the room. He opened the casement. The night was fresh, bright, and
plunder were stopped by the authorities and made to cart the corpses

Kutúzov looked wearily at him and, lifting his hands with a gesture of
Rostóv, growing red and pale alternately, looked first at one officer
and was a stranger there. In his person, honor was shown to a simple
determine for whom and for what he felt such particular delight in
longer possible to take the whole of it away.
“Who are you? Bonaparte!...” shouted Makár Alexéevich.
He was a peasant from Pokróvsk, near the river Gzhat. When Denísov had
same coalescence into a group of enormous dimensions; the same adhesion
Count Rostopchín, who now taunted those who left Moscow and now had the
“Qui s’excuse s’accuse,” * said Julie, smiling and waving the lint
been made earlier and that a battle should have been fought two days
gave his hand to the plague-stricken; but ... but there are other acts
to admit so infinitely small a remainder of inevitability as equaled
there. Thoughts of home grew stronger the nearer he approached it—far

yourselves. It must be here somewhere,” said Lavrúshka.

more honorable to admit one’s mistake than to let matters become
her look. She felt strange and awkward.
changed their wet things for dry ones.
he never knew or remembered. “This must be one of her companions,” he

expression seized Princess Mary’s hand.

with the expression with which people compliment their host at a ball.
one of them he dwelt long and joyfully. He vividly recalled an evening
“I shall come to a place and pray there, and before having time to get
give them all, and her too, peace and happiness. And it seemed to her
turning to Prince Vasíli and answering his imploring look. “Yes, or
Natásha gave Borís a similar smile.


Bilíbin’s sleeve. “But I love them, you know, and don’t want to distress

The troops retired from Vílna for various complicated reasons of state,
Though Napoleon at that time, in 1812, was more convinced than ever that
CHAPTER VI

“We’re going into action, gentlemen!”
every decision would be approved by them all with very few exceptions.
“Where to now, your excellency?” asked the coachman.
Bagratión’s troops, which had not yet advanced into action but were

those men who choose their opinions like their clothes according to
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the

unnecessary crockery should not be taken at all. When everything had
sounded far away. Here everyone clearly saw and said that the battle
waiting to see what he would do. He stood a little while before the
Passing behind one of the lines of a regiment of Foot Guards he heard a
affronted, was finishing with these words:
service... it can’t be helped... one is sometimes a bit hasty on

appeared from behind his company and, though he was a middle-aged man
“Ah, your excellency,” put in Zherkóv, his eyes fixed on the

But they had still to call at the Taurida Gardens.
baring his yellow teeth and snapping at his hind legs.

thing can be arranged. It shall be on your family’s behalf that I’ll
The foreboding of evil that had suddenly come over Rostóv was more and
usually so described.
dealt with public questions. If anyone gave or asked for personal


baggage, their artillery, and half their men, and fled, getting past the
not cause the least embarrassment to Countess Bezúkhova, who evidently

who dealt the blow, the look of silent, timid reproach that boy in the

something... With what? Pierre could not say, and he did not try to

beginning to pace up and down the room. “I always thought it.... That
by Napoleon at a review, evoked in him a desire to punish the Russians
its native fields.”
themselves as in the depths of a forest amid that crowd of strangers,
white foam from his bit, tramping the planks of the bridge with his
that he could not believe his eyes. “Who are they? Why are they
Willarski bowed his head.
scattered fragments of the army he left behind.
could have the effrontery to continue firing from four quite undefended
had not left Prince Vasíli’s and felt with terror that in people’s

looking at his watch.
the Minister of War and went to join the army in Moldavia. While in
CHAPTER XV
A short stout man of about thirty, in white breeches and high boots and
not weep or shudder and during these last days they themselves felt
France he ordered everybody to obey him, and they all obeyed him. Having
arranged near the watchman’s hut in the forest, and told the officer on

There’s a gentleman for you!”
dressed. Princess Mary’s self-esteem was wounded by the fact that
and proud sphere, Prince Andrew noticed the following sharply defined
one another that the larger number take a more direct share, and the
resolved to go away next day and leave a letter informing her of his
he was being crushed, together with that of rapture, still further
Your loss is so terrible that I can only explain it to myself as a
obey,” answered the quartermaster.
his father’s peculiarities, and partly because he needed solitude,
not be understood or approved by her husband.
in the streets of Petersburg in an old uniform. He made friends with
having left home a boy he had returned (as everybody told him) a fine
Kutúzov sat up with one leg hanging down from the bed and his big paunch
Louisa Ivánovna (Madame Schoss) would go with them, the young ladies

rested on Prince Andrew’s face.
On the march from Vyázma to Tsárevo-Zaymíshche he rode his light bay

for the first fortnight. She received letters from her relations to
understood it all, and at the same time followed a train of personal
smile of kindliness puckered the soldier’s lips as he put these

through it.
source of self-consciousness it would be subject to reasoning and


though without knowing its cause—was such as to remind one still more
of how he had saved the life of a Pole (in general, the saving of
formally.) “Though I don’t agree with the gentleman...” (he hesitated:


account or the number of quarters of flour in any of the endless
will do more than if you paralyze it by encumbering it with remedies.
general the head steward made out to Pierre that his project of raising
hand.
collective action which cannot find its justification in political
“I am very sorry to have made you travel so far,” said he.
“Because I love you!” was what he wanted to say, but he did not say it,
waited for him to go on, but as he seemed quite decided to say no more
moment of the present in which alone I am conscious of myself as living,

looting and re-establish discipline.
he already commanded the squadron he had taken over from Denísov.
his portrait, “definitely demanded that he should be called.”
unabashed by her presence made remarks about her as though she were some
in his saddle.
often she told herself that she must not get irritable when teaching her
hanging down (she had handed her reticule to the countess), and only her
“Sónya,” she suddenly exclaimed, as if she had guessed the true
“How can he talk like that?” thought Pierre. He considered his

he treated Balashëv not as an envoy from his enemy, but as a man
Princess Mary’s questions and especially by Natásha’s into giving a
soldiers to change into their greatcoats. The company commanders ran off
the bushes came the huntsman who had been fighting and rode toward
promise tormented her.
fire and pressed it there!”
commands, letters, reports, and orders of the day; called one another

had seemed as extraordinary to her as if there had never existed the

referred to in that drawing room as “a man of great merit” (un homme
    CHAPTER XIV
by their redness to contrast more than usual with his gray hair. At the
whispered Shinshín. Countess Bezúkhova turned smiling to the newcomer,
at Denísov, now at the esaul, and now at the French in the village and
executing of the plan.

from Petersburg. There was no general plan of action. The vacillation

niece passed, “Sónya, won’t you write to Nicholas?” She spoke in a soft,
there were a couple of dozen men in Paris who began to talk about all
more and at last the wall fell, and with it the men who had been pushing
cruelty, debauchery, and drunkenness. And in spite of all this it is the

and all along the French line on the hill fires flared up and the
cause of the confusion, turned away with indifference, as if to say,
of a force compelling men to direct their activity toward a certain end.
was crying. Prince Andrew kissed him and evidently did not know what to
because they would all receive handsome presents for the holidays.
me... I confess it. For some reason you wish to deprive me of our former
“A splendid soldier, splendid! ‘What am I attached to!’ Ha, ha,
The old prince came in to supper; this was evidently on Pierre’s
over his shoulder by a thin strap. He sat heavily and swayed limply on
here and there the blackened walls of some brick houses. Pierre gazed
The count went into the house with him, repeating his order not to
morning. Pierre expected to find Prince Andrew in almost the same state
the key to the whole position.
fresh and attractive. The music became more and more audible. The melody
    CHAPTER IV
knuckles, then the next knuckle, whispering, “January, February,

subject of the liveliest jokes by the whole detachment—jokes in which
recalcitrant cavalry colonel, his own dignity as a general, and above



unplaited, replaited, and tied up her plait. Her head moved from side
and stopped near him.
holding him in my arms, and saw that his face was young, but that he



her. She did not think of applying submission and self-abnegation to her
to demonstrate the defects of the latter and the merits of his own plan,
the special deep cooing tone, precluding the possibility of interrupting
hurriedly up to the unknown general and blocking his way to the door.
good-humored laugh.

almost at a trot through the deserted streets toward the Yaúza bridge to
the verses were finished Prince Andrew went up to Speránski and took

(of whom there were but few) moved about among the soldiers quite


deserter from the French army being brought to him. This was a Polish
On the rug-covered bench where Pierre had seen him in the morning sat
beloved Russia; to defile Thy temples, to overthrow Thine altars, and to
stupid old man (as he called Rostóv), who had made him stay by assuring
he would lead away heaven only knew where. How could one capture a
Having jerked out these last words as soldiers do and waved his arms

she ought not to have asked it. He smiled, looking at her, and said he
“You are mistaken,” said Borís deliberately, with a bold and
sitting noisily backward and forward, made efforts to control himself

a mixed feeling of estrangement and tenderness pressed her lips to his
laid back (Karáy was pinning her by the throat), was the happiest
them in a stern and threatening attitude.
thought that he, an exemplary officer of many years’ service who
porch.
of purpose and possessed of authority and power.

“Wait a moment, I’ll fetch it,” said Mademoiselle Bourienne, and she
recognize how erroneous is the specialist historians’ view of the force
    CHAPTER IV
“You are a Cossack?”

flight has been arranged to get all the old maids married off. Catiche

him be here....”
eyes, glittering feverishly, met Pierre with a questioning look the
“I hate you, I hate you! You’re my enemy forever!” And Natásha
the left where the Vóyna flowing between its marshy banks falls into


nonreceipt of our dispatch of November 18. That is how it will end.”
he had brought from the Empress, on two chairs directly in front of the


courtyard and wished to see him.
of them attribute to Pfuel, others to a certain Frenchman, others to
“What a darling Uncle is!” said Natásha, when they had come out
By a strange coincidence, this task, which turned out to be a most


and take personal command, and to have walked about with a birch stick
arms and their sabers in the air.
that,” and he answered by bowing his head. I opened the book, and on
failed him. He was seized by panic and could not go where it was
to adopt a jocular tone. But before he had finished he felt that his


Kutúzov. With his sixty years’ experience he knew what value to attach
tiptoe to the countess’ door and paused.
in the middle of the line that had seemed so terrible—and now he
The clear blue eyes looked at the commander in chief just as boldly as
news that you, with the army, have decided to abandon Moscow. You can
ventured to express surprise that well-known doctors had not been called
the commander in chief would inspect the regiment on the march. Though
“Voilà l’agrément des camps, monsieur le prince,” * said the
“But tell me, how will your husband look at the matter?” Bilíbin asked,
diamonds, she passed between the men who made way for her, not looking
Frenchmen, and though but a moment before he had been galloping to get

have told you”; and not replying a word to Berg who was now mute beside
for. Am I not right, good Christians?” said the tall youth, with a


greatness, and again—as a horse walking a treadmill thinks it is doing
into Moscow before noon.”
novelty she offered her guests this time was not Mortemart, but a

word.
her armchair and called Natásha and the count to her.
the east. The abandoned campfires were burning themselves out in the
willingly promised to do it all for her, Natásha sat down on the floor,
“No,” said Natásha, though she had in reality been thinking about
Natásha’s intermediacy, to remind him of his promise, and then

“No. I’m quite, quite all right. I feel so comfortable!” answered
harness bells; she hears him coming! He comes in, just in the shape of a
these people sans foi ni loi * can give it him—people who recklessly


It began to run away only when suddenly seized by a panic caused by the
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
nothing of what was going on around him and to be absorbed by some

stopped him. He turned his horse and galloped off.
on the one hand indecision and the avoidance of a battle (which we could

who were right in the heat of the battle acted according to the mood
understood it.
something to Prince Andrew. Pierre went up to his friend and, asking
it several times to his nose, and stopped in front of Balashëv. He
across the threshing ground to a field leading to the Otrádnoe wood.

middle of which soldiers were watering their lean horses at the pump

“Look at them scurrying! It’s burning! Just see the smoke! Fine!
The day after his son had left, Prince Nicholas sent for Princess Mary
earthly things, that had incessantly tormented him, no longer presented
turn away from the sight, shouting angrily at the men who, as is always
letter, but comforted him with hopes of reconciling their father to the
“For her I might as well not exist!” thought Prince Andrew while he
interest to them. And all for me!”
“The general orders them all to be driven out at once, without fail.
“But it’s impossible...” declared the gentlemen of the suite, shrugging
without his boots (he had given them to the canteen keeper to dry),


“It’s all up! I’m lost!” thought he. “Now a bullet through my
Anatole went into the back room.

Frenchman. “Good-by, Fatty. We must be human, we are all mortal you
refutation he needed, would again descend to the level of the original
of the river.
eyes upon it, told her to read the letter aloud. When she had done so
put this man back in his place and bring him water.

know for certain in how far his genius was genuine in Egypt—where forty
thanked him for his love. His looks thanked her for offering him his
He continued to pace the room, looking gloomily at Denísov and the
in some respects a brilliant match for the dowerless, orphan girl. From

As a criminal who is being led to execution knows that he must die
kept going, and in this consciousness of being indispensable every
honest, practical man and we have nobody better. Give him real power,
awkward about entering on such an explanation. From day to day he
Anísya Fëdorovna, struck a single chord, pure and sonorous, and then
and foul. Black robber bees are swiftly and stealthily prowling about
She says it’s very fine.”

“Has he been married long?” she asked. “On your honor?...”
white teeth fiercely and spurring his black thoroughbred Arab, which

His room was on the first floor. Those in the rooms above were also
his left elbow with a somewhat theatrical gesture, and, with a wink at
He paused and rubbed his face and eyes with his hands.
“Don’t joke; I mean to have a serious talk with you. Do you know

can’t bear those old men! Eh?”

unnatural smile. “I expect you have guessed that Prince Vasíli has

the rest of the evening.
fiftieth part of its former inhabitants had remained, but it was empty.
extricated himself from an awkward situation and placed another in it,
“Why, nothing,” answered Pierre without raising his eyes or changing the
    CHAPTER XVIII
“Yes,” replied Princess Mary. “He has greatly improved.”
Pierre felt her eyes on him and tried not to look round. The countess
from Hollabrünn) received Murat’s dispatch with the proposal of a
now to approach the gentlemen-in-waiting in that plight he would not be
undressing, tugging at the tapes of her petticoat.
such music.
“Such an insolent scoundrel!” he cried, growing hot again at the mere
hands high, shied, throwing back its ears; but the pockmarked Guardsman
went on to say that he knew her parents would not give her to him—for
young master. “Can it be? My treasure!” and Prokófy, trembling with
him, he’s a scoundrel. Go on! Go on!”
from the hot house carrying in their skirts plums they had plucked from
movement by Napoleon which might endanger the army—news subsequently
human wills produced the Revolution and Napoleon, and only the sum of
without her parents’ knowledge and that the cause of this was Anatole
service.”
by the amusing scene she foresaw. She drew her wool down through the

“Who’s that? Why? Wait a moment!” Anatole’s face seemed to say.
and explained to them his intentions and wishes. He told them that steps
staff?”
rolled-up check kerchief in her hand. While still a few steps from
For an order to be certainly executed, it is necessary that a man should
grimace. “Really it’s no time for your stupid jokes,” and he left
Pierre—there was something resembling what he had seen on the face of
“I went for another one,” Tíkhon continued, “and I crept like this
at the soldiers who were blocking his way. “Hi there, boys! Keep to
as tight as possible, and flying away! Like this....”
and accused of being a French “spyer” (so Count Rostopchín had told the
“I ask one thing of you,” he said sternly, “to obey me and not shove
to pretend to the steward that he was attending to it. The steward


hospitality, did the honors to the prince.

But pure and complete sorrow is as impossible as pure and complete joy.
early hour when she met no one but bricklayers going to work or men
are forcing us to exterminate them. So much the worse for the Russian
As he approached, a ringing shot issued from it deafening him and his
father!” thought she, trying to restrain her wrath. “Hard as it may
“Let go, I tell you! I will take the responsibility. I myself will go
Can it be possible?” she thought, not daring to look at his face, but
that movement from east to west?
medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but
When Natásha left the room Pierre’s confusion and awkwardness
every Russian. But why are you so anxious? You have still time to get
Pávlovna again touched Pierre’s sleeve, saying: “I hope you won’t
demand the punishment for such an act; in the case of a virtuous act we
Facing him lay a field of winter rye, there his own huntsman stood alone
The princess looked round and saw Natásha coming in, almost running—that
we can foretell the result.
so universal historians will be valuable only when they can reply to
those recently arrived from Russia, both Guards and regiments of the
talks sense, but to temporize and wait for something now when Bonaparte
was the factory lad in the loose cloak. The moment they laid hands on
“Take off your cap... your caps!” These words went from one to another
embarrassing attentions. On the face of the wag Zherkóv there suddenly
anything, when suddenly the well-known whispering of Mademoiselle
mortal or not had hung over Kutúzov’s head for a whole month. On the one




Dólokhov a few days before, and on the day that Sónya, after listening
“They are waiting for their younger son,” Pierre replied. “He joined

reached through his. But instead of being greeted with pleasure as she
a batiste shirt that he had evidently only just put on, standing in that
Anatole sighed and embraced Dólokhov.

The guests welcomed Pierre because he always helped to enliven and unite
there but that no shots were being fired from the battery. He had no
he went forward uneasily over the rough field with the awkward gait of

“No, I am not going,” Pierre replied hastily, in a surprised tone and as
Rarely had Natásha experienced so joyful a feeling as now, sitting in

the cold in his head at Borodinó to the sparks which set Moscow on
All who had known Natásha before her marriage wondered at the change

background. She was so ill that it was impossible for them to consider
I speak to him?”

repairing their footgear, some smoking pipes, and some stripping

run away. And next day, Count Ilyá Rostóv—though he had not yet quite
CHAPTER X
and was crossing himself with his right hand, turning his eyes upward
The chill that had been running down Pierre’s back now seized his head
patiently to disentangle them. The countess, with her loving heart, felt
“Is the Englishman bragging?... Eh? Is it all right?” said Anatole.
But dazed by the force of the movement, it was long before people
plague does not touch him. The cruelty of murdering prisoners is not
“Anatole, come with me! I must speak to you,” he added in French.
tenderness she had been feeling for him vanished instantly and was
“Why do you shout so? You’ll frighten them!” said Borís. “I did
Two of the gazers went round to the other side of the coach and sat down
but this dreadful incessant moaning made her sob. The countess exchanged
she replied to the countess’ inquiry about Caulaincourt. “Looks as
Hearing those moans Prince Andrew wanted to weep. Whether because he

and trembling, threw a frightened look of inquiry at Anatole and moved

wish to see you, I do not think so and do not want to do so. You will
caught up the object of contention and ran into the bedroom. The eldest

“Yes, she’s fast enough,” replied Nicholas, and thought: “If
himself.

“The picket is still on the hill, your excellency, just where it was
commanders, and with a consciousness of being too late spreading through
rose above the other sounds, did not cease for a moment. The mistress
of simpletons.”) L’amour which the Frenchman worshiped consisted
out and, leaning against the doorpost, looked with glittering envious
know!”

in which the lucky ones, such as the squadron commander, had a board,
woman, and looked from under her long lashes with motionless, large,
cutting off the enemy’s retreat and the soundness of the only possible
cried to the maid, angrily opening her mouth and still farther exposing

“You know, chère Marie,” said Mademoiselle Bourienne, “that we are in
major.
has an influence on him and controls at least some side of his activity.
to forget it all and not let anyone see that something had happened.
She saw his face, heard his voice, repeated his words and her own, and

putrefaction and hospital air. On the stairs he met a Russian army
memorable week, there had been the extraordinary autumn weather that
needs, and of your welfare. Its members will be distinguished by a red
Novosíltsev, Prince Volkónsky, Strógonov, and the others, all richly

from the army and would certainly write to his father, but that the
over his shoulder.
A fortnight after the letter Prince Vasíli’s servants came one
to unite. Thoughts cannot be united, but to harness all these thoughts

whose words struck Pierre more and more by their precision and firmness.
friend, it has of late become hard for me to live. I see that I have
The first consideration is the clearness of our perception of the man’s
been till then. At that time Dokhtúrov had under his command, besides
right.
told himself that he would propose tomorrow. But in Julie’s presence,
of a contemporary, the consequences of which are still unknown to me.

live and cook their porridge. Moscow was burned by its inhabitants, it
conservatory. There she paused and stood listening to the conversation
prepared by long and diligent self-purification, not everyone can hope
a white horse followed by his suite, and said something in passing:
up, glanced at what had been done, and with horror, reproach, and
the window sill, but refrained from touching it. Pierre again covered

said the doctor with evident satisfaction. “Prussian doctors have been
into the redoubt before a thin, sallow-faced, perspiring man in a blue

bridge was at times veiled by a diaphanous curtain of slanting rain, and
women are when you see them in their true colors! When you meet them
Emperor. The Emperor Francis, a rosy, long faced young man, sat very
journey, which she took so actively in hand, saved her for a while from
wotten and howwible, but the Tugendbund I don’t understand. If we’re


Is the army retreating or will there be another battle?”
He quickly entered the small reception room with its still-unplastered
On August 1, a second letter was received from Prince Andrew. In his
felt an estrangement from everything belonging to this world, terrible
but only that he would be with the army. The Emperor, moreover, had
“How’s this, Colonel?” he shouted as he approached. “I told you
Petersburg, he should tell her so afresh.

us there in three hours! Only the near one died of it.”
was warm blood under his arm. “No, I am wounded and the horse is
there is a yet sharper division of those who, because their activity is

he was sent to hard labor in Siberia.
arrest me for being here, what would it matter?” thought he, looking
and saying something in their gypsy accents. Nicholas understood that it

he placed on this red borzoi. Natásha saw and felt the agitation the
the seat the old prince used to like to sit on, and beside him strips of
be conscious of the physical weariness of his aged body and of the

“She was so tired that she has fallen asleep on the sofa in my room.

does she think about me? Yes, she is splendid!”
After the condescending surprise, nonrecognition, and praise, from those

CHAPTER XI
in a pathetic whisper what had become of her husband who had remained
a fellow diplomat, “that the Chancellor told him flatly that his
past. When, intoxicated by the crimes he has committed so successfully,
laughed.
plan, evidently engrossed in his own ideas.
“Yes,” said Natásha. “Do you know, Nicholas—don’t be
campaign by occupying Moscow as he had ended a previous campaign by

with curly light-brown hair and beautiful eyes, was delighted because
last interview with the gentleman-ranker—“that Private Dólokhov,
wall of a shed, the roof of which had already been removed.
and, as it might seem, of the obligations to her he had taken on
Russia can and as long as there are men able to stand....
little ones, Mamma and Papa, their relations to her, and so on—and these
growing impatient, and stamped her foot, ready to cry at his not coming
other half brightly lit by the sun. Alpátych looked out of the window
agreeable), “and so I wish to arrange just a small party for my own

never have led me to suppose that that could serve as a pretext for
Karp and Vlas (who after the French had evacuated Moscow drove in their
might deprive him of all this happiness, newly appreciated and newly
been misled by their governor. And these ruined inhabitants, setting
Half an hour later he was driving with his fast horses across the

“Call him in, call him here.”
Muttering to herself, she sat down on a chair.
in a frightened whisper when the sergeant major had passed on.
in the year 1812 when the French emperor was forty-two. This prophecy
is called weak character, do not seek a confidant in their troubles. He
     * (2) “Come in, come in.”
a moment, “yes, bring me seven hundred rubles, yes! But mind, don’t
to remain with his regiment. And since it had to be so, Nicholas Rostóv,


putting the nightshirt over his dried-up old body and gray-haired chest.
kissed her forehead.
such brilliant and polite young men, beamed with satisfaction, try as
when behind the purpose for which they strive that of exercising their
Peter Petróvich Konovnítsyn, like Dokhtúrov, seems to have been included
“Very large,” answered Rostóv. “But why have you collected here?” he



and did not go wrong in the side streets that led to the Povarskóy.
had understood the peasants’ tastes and aspirations, had learned to talk

baize-covered tables and their pigeonholes of documents in small rooms.
mother by the news of this loss, he knew what a relief it would be to

the time with a feverish tremor. The man was sobbing and choking
the contrary case, Your Majesty, I shall see myself forced to repel an
and began translating for him, hardly able to keep pace with Pfuel, who

the European peoples from west to east and afterwards from east to west.
who ran downstairs and looked over from the halfway landing.
young Brothers who were influential through their connections or rank,
externally as before, all his former amusements lost their charm for him
a winter campaign and, on the other, the character given to the war


health?”
twisted upwards, sat the ruddy Milorádovich in a military pose, his
police tried to interfere, and what did the young men do? They tied

wished it so.
asked with a slight smile. “I guessed it then when we met at the
orders he gave before and during the battle would have been still more
ears listening to the shouting and trampling that resounded from all



feel, was in danger. They could not think of anything but how to help




crowding around the dams and banks of the ponds near the village of
in smaller groups in retreat, unconsciously confirms the truth that the
is conceivable.
round shoulders shuddered as if a cold shiver had run down them, how his
fine tactical war”; and, laughing contemptuously, went on into the room
then that same face pale, quivering, and suffering, as it had been when
of the war with Austria, and unconsciously jumped from the general
eyes and shrinking, he tried to pass unnoticed between the rows of
“Yes, indeed, that’s a true sage,” thought Pierre. “He sees nothing

him.” The mere thought of her father’s look filled her with terror.
hand and kissed her husband, and asked him why he was angry with her.

a plain farmer: he did not like innovations, especially the English ones
urged on his already weary horse to get quickly past these crowds, but
repeated the field marshal’s address, begun solemnly and then changing
All that was done around her and to her at this time, all the attention
Prince Andrew found life easier to bear. After his betrothed had broken
“Mind, walk him up and down well!”
of everything. One must think of the future, of all of you... I love you
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm, including

unconscious of his existence, as he might brush a chip from his path,
first of all devote some time to solitude and self-examination and do
citizens nor soldiers but what are known as marauders. When five weeks

Rostóv with the same expression of hope, of relief, reproach, and
insolent, hard, and mocking face as he had seen it at the banquet, and
“Tomorrow, I hear, the Preobrazhénskis will give them a dinner.”
“Whether Dólokhov comes or not, we must seize it, eh?” said Denísov with

nation, appears impossible.
     of whom you have made a friend, but not for you, not for


1809 he was a captain in the Guards, wore medals, and held some special
table. Denísov was sitting there scratching with his pen on a sheet of

the time Hélène reached Moscow had been an intimate in her house. The

“And I will tell you this,” Prince Andrew interrupted in a tone of
even more bewildered than he, and do not say the words they should have
her hair.
mind. “If a tenth part of his detachment returns I shall thank God,”
the most skillful strategist could hardly have devised any series

gunner with his shako knocked awry, pulling one end of a mop while
Hippolyte burst out laughing.
whispered that Augustin had been forbidden to leave, that traitors had
the revolving pulleys whirr with the rapidity of their movement, but a
smallest detail for the purpose they had to fulfill, than Napoleon and
the dead eyes, and hastened to close them. She closed them but did not

the Emperor Alexander that the war was being carried on contrary to all
their cleanliness and discipline. They had come by easy stages, their

was based on his trickery and deception of the people. So the historians
command, I shall let my beard grow to here” (he pointed halfway down his
“This is Dólokhov,” said Prince Andrew.
truth—science—which he himself has invented but which is for him the

his new uniform, sat beside his wife explaining to her that one always
done by a concourse of people, allowing those who do not take a direct
Kiev province, where he had the greatest number of serfs, taking with
So thought the Emperor, and the Russian commanders and people were still
subject. “Do you know what I heard today? Poor Mary Bolkónskaya arrived
outflank the Drissa camp.

thousands of others those few commands which were consistent with that
from the infinitely large to the infinitely small. The same is done by
“Love hinders death. Love is life. All, everything that I understand, I
produced very brilliant results.
And he began to sob, and again tears flowed from his eyes. Princess Mary


ascended the knoll from which, according to the doctor, the battlefield

he marked the figures in his clear, bold hand.
their quarters at Yankóvo, ten miles from Boguchárovo, and went for a
trembling lips—came out and passed through the waiting room, clutching
contention.
about to ask their way of an elderly footman who had sprung up as they
whisper, “has compromised her completely, they say. Pierre took him
but in Anna Pávlovna’s presence no one dared to think of this or even
In 1812 and 1813 Kutúzov was openly accused of blundering. The Emperor

and they were more excited. But Pierre, though he felt that something
“No, it’s not he. How can you talk such nonsense?”
gazed with great glassy eyes at this crowd of dogs and men surrounding



you see? You see a reign of goodness and truth on earth, but I don’t
and bind Karp. The men obediently came out of the crowd and began taking
“I begin ab ovo. ‘The enemy of the human race,’ as you know,

right wing are heard. The sharpshooters of Morand’s division and of
and moved along the ranks shouting. The train drivers and orderlies
“Máshka’s sweet root.” It was very bitter, but they wandered
hand and hid with her behind a birch tree, not stopping to pick up some

order about the prisoners that day. Sokolóv, one of the soldiers in the
    CHAPTER XI

want to know.”

ponderous steps up to her sister-in-law.
her father was tidy. She put down the geometry book and eagerly broke
To get a better view, several officer prisoners climbed onto the wall of
“Natásha!” he whispered in French, “do you know I have made up my
this. Involuntarily Rostóv recalled all the good he had heard about
conscience that God has implanted in our souls.”
Wolzogen, nonchalantly stretching his legs, approached Kutúzov with a
“Thank you... daughter dear!... for all, for all... forgive!... thank
instant, as if to give the visitor time to greet her aunt, and then

decomposition; and as the wolves were kept off by the passing men the
blocked, it could not carry across the frontier more than it actually
flower, you know—like some strawberry blossoms. Sometimes I am sorry for
special providence of God who, loving you, wishes to try you and your
Rostopchín felt this, and it was this which exasperated him.
so consistently led him by an uninterrupted series of successes to the
Stopping in front of the Pávlograds, the Tsar said something in French
him serve. But if your father is mortally sick you’ll send the valet


guns and men lost—than Krásnoe had been, as the figures show.

direction, I see that I raised it in the direction in which there was
he had too long been thinking of so painfully to the exclusion of all
CHAPTER XXII
“Eh? What?” asked Prince Andrew.
spadefuls of red clay were continually being thrown up from behind the
the mother’s sacrificing herself and offering her daughter in marriage
The princess was about to reply, but her father would not let her speak
and hastened to reassure him.
impressively, blocking the way to the bedroom and preventing the other
oak, I shall not discover the cause of the bells ringing, the engine
Rostóv went back into the hall and noticed that in the porch there were
“Little countess!” the count’s voice called from behind the door.
“Good morning, Uncle!” said Nicholas, when the old man drew near.

he.
Mary, I am going to love him very much,” said Lise, looking with


Borís, too, with his friend Zhilínski, came to see the Preobrazhénsk
question which match would be the more advantageous. Whether it was
and, before the latter had time to draw his sword, knocked him off his

That evening, proud of Dólokhov’s proposal, her refusal, and her

expecting every moment to see his dead face, and she felt that the
will you? You may want us one of these days.”
The sound of musketry at the foot of the hill, now diminishing, now
two days, and that that success had increased our strength tenfold. He

had conquered, settled down in an armchair, inviting Prince Vasíli to
but Rostóv had no chance of being present at the review he held at

a most serious, deferential, and innocent expression.
At these sounds, long unheard, Rostóv’s spirits rose, as at the strains
“Hurrah!” shouted Prince Andrew, and, scarcely able to hold up
have the carriage to drive to town:
But hardly had the princess looked at Natásha’s face before she realized
plump white shoulders and neck, round which she wore a double string of
“Stop, stop! You have your whole life before you,” said he to her.
detachment halted at the outskirts of a forest, on the path leading from
formal “you” instead of the intimate “thou” in speaking to her.
She came in to dinner with red eyes. Márya Dmítrievna, who knew how

little princess walked twice round her, now adjusting a fold of the

the countess as her mother and called her so) “that I am spoiling
light gray...”
“But if I were right, I should be rendering a service to my Fatherland
importance. It was something white by the door—the statue of a sphinx,
arrival. From that day, as the doctor expressed it, the wasting fever


had been thinking about something else. But she had to force herself to

had European life, politics, Freemasonry, philosophy, and philanthropy
Pale, with quivering lips, Pierre snatched the copy.
nothing.
“Why could that not be as well?” she sometimes asked herself in
and indulgently to smooth with it the heart of his neighbor. As to the
affectation. They went silently to table. The footmen drew back the
let us close the shop....”

Others did not like that tone and said it was stupid and vulgar. It was
to all the club members and to all the club guests, and finally to
craft exposed, he should have appeared to them what he appeared ten
When Michael Ivánovich returned to the study with the letter, the old
rate there was no one more active and experienced than Bennigsen: “and
with upraised arms.
company and overtook the next one.

rest of you. Let me live like a man and think of my soul and of God.”
ever, only showing still more irritability and skepticism as to what was
“Oh, ja,” said the other, “der Zweck ist nur den Feind zu schwächen,
but she did not even see the Emperor, and only noticed that he had gone
“Oh, yes, he has been waiting to start for some time.”
a single armed enemy remains in my country!” It seemed to Borís that it

to the prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show that political
and quickly shuffling on his feeble legs to a chair, he almost fell into
“What were you saying?” he asked the general, who continuing his report
promptly all that related to the gist of the business was evaded. He
who had recently opened a restaurant there with girls as waitresses.

him than any other spot on the plain of Borodinó.
“What rubbish you’re talking!” said the countess.
excited horse he galloped forward along the village street.

peace arising from consciousness of having stifled those personal dreams
he wanted to say and nodded approval.
in, and sinking heavily into an armchair.
as he alleged, he exposed his army to danger on this march, and it was

“If we don’t take it tomowwow, he’ll snatch it fwom under our noses,” he

memory of the easy victory at Tarútino, urged Kutúzov to carry out


whole trend of thought he had formed during his life of seclusion quite
faces, the wall of soldiers burdened with knapsacks and muskets marched
What force made men act so? These are the instinctive, plain, and
or a child?...”

faint morning light.
Nicholas was present, was held in the cathedral for the Russian victory.
incendiaries the rest of Moscow burned down.
inappropriate, she was unable to stop him.
not? Delightful!”
Another pretext would be her snuff, which would seem too dry or too damp

that had seized them at the start. Once at a standstill they all seemed
him: yet that burst of frankness, together with other trifling events,
on the stairs, and the general, leaving him, went to the porch. The


fur-lined coat had turned upon him. “But I did not do it for my own

DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
occupied with evening parties, dinners, lunches, and balls, giving him
wealthy Julie with emotion, and resignation to the Divine will.
them from others was the absence of host or hostess and the presence of
wished to come to Moscow, grew angry, abused the French in very bad
“And that would be splendid,” said Pierre.
“I told you it was all lumps and holes!” the little princess

bridge. Pétya, his heart in his mouth with excitement, rode by his side.

He would say a lot of pleasant things, ask you to dinner” (“That
sounds very fast: “Kari, mala, tafa, safi, muter, Kaská,” he said,


put a little dripping. The pleasant odor of greasy viands mingled with
at the door Prince Andrew and the figure of the old man in a white
riding, and sometimes, when he came within six paces of them, the
“Oh yes,” assented Princess Mary, “perhaps that’s it. I’ll go.
glory of that achievement of genius to different men and dispute as to
gleamed from the east and the sun’s rim appeared solemnly from behind a

battlefield. On the field between Borodinó and the flèches, beside the


the dusty road came the infantry in ranks, bareheaded and with arms
and cleverness, and knew of something else that would decide the
CHAPTER VI
out whether she was considering what he had just said or whether she was
They say the other day Matthew Iványch Plátov drove them into the river
for him to meet ladies at dinners and balls in Petersburg.
and several other less noteworthy persons.
the very time he was expressing this conviction to himself, in another
saddle and touched up his horse to ride once more round his hussars. It
Why did it happen in this and not in some other way?
Just then Zherkóv entered the room.

When les enfants du Don might so easily have taken the Emperor himself
for Natásha, with a pale and set face, entered the room from the door
manner nor a desire to enter into conversation, but speaking so quietly
angry at this and went to fight the French once more. And they defeated
experiment or argument, recognized by all thinkers and felt by everyone
where he was and what lay before him that very day.
Pierre then explained that he had loved this woman from his earliest

“Why a blue coat? Off with it... Sergeant major! Change his coat...
provinces. Your army is grumbling.”

Nicholas was sleeping came the sound of his even breathing, every
seen were exactly what she had seen in the mirror.
but as it is...”

Jobert came to see Hélène when she was alone, and after that often came
head. He seemed to be unable to understand the meaning of all these

And rapidly opening the door he went resolutely out onto the balcony.
and scented myself.”

a slightly contemptuous smile, he said: “Yes, there are many stories

what was taking place. There for several hours amid incessant cannon and

news that Dólokhov was soon coming and that all was well with him.
kissed her hand and went out.
breathing of that great and beautiful body.
is quite original, strange, new, and unknown. And she loves me. What
The count jumped up and, swaying from side to side, spread his arms wide
glances over the edge of the wood, with the two scraggy oaks rising
him by God. But as soon as we do not admit that, it becomes essential to


“What devil brought them here?” thought he, while Tíkhon was
same as usual,” and Princess Mary pale, frightened, and with downcast
ever-lucky gambler who, after recklessly flinging money about and always

And really another French soldier, trailing his musket, ran up to

“A staff officer was here a minute ago, but skipped off,” said an



received pleasant recognitions corresponding to their various grades,
“Well, au revoir, Bolkónski! Au revoir, Prince! Come back early to
one of her customary states in which she needed the mental exertion of
remembered the general plan sent him from Petersburg) “they have
“Oh, Yákov Alpátych! What have you come for?”

portfolio.


    CHAPTER VII
“Yes, and where do you put the others?” inquired Dólokhov.
abandoning the attempt. “I can’t prove it to you. You say that
he got his wound. This pleased Rostóv and he began talking about it,


“You wouldn’t go, it takes courage....”
the early days of their marriage, took her about with him wherever the

so on. Then a place was assigned to Pierre, he was shown the signs of
his wife’s affairs, and his official duties. He regarded all these
there, do you see that village and the smoke? That’s Semënovsk, yes,
Again Napoleon brought out his snuffbox, paced several times up and down


with all its menacing and majestic strength, and without consulting


letting the retreating companies pass by them, when a soldier came up
The commander of the company, with his eyes fixed on his superior,
So naturally, simply, and gradually—just as he had come from Turkey to

Moscow after that battle had said unanimously that it was impossible to




even increased to desperation like a man who, straining himself, shrieks

turning into the village already... they will have their buckwheat



clenching his vigorous fist. “And fairness, of course,” he added, “for
“Well, if you hadn’t told me you were Russian, I should have wagered

When she looked up at him she was struck by his beauty. Anatole stood
glass of vodka and the dinner; and the staff officer with the signet
all the walls of the room: it was her own heart, sinking with alarm and
senseless and unattainable.
generals, gentlemen-in-waiting, and Polish magnates—several of whom

“Yes, but it is hard for us to imagine eternity,” remarked Dimmler,
company that assembled at her house, without incurring any obligation.
concurrently with, action on the front to bar the advance of the French,
rage, “who are you? Are you in command here? Eh? I am commander here,

straight! It’s well God had mercy on us. And what was it for? Who
1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project
of the French was unguarded were merely final indications that it was
to take advantage of this chance to capture some horses, but one of
French in Spain, was much appreciated when he related it at Alexander’s
Nicholas, dear noble Nicholas, do when he hears of it? So this is

“I have no money with me,” he said.

The princess smiled. She rose with the same unchanging smile with which

dear child, consult only your own heart. That is all I have to say,” and
approaching departure did not prevent his amusing himself, but rather
“Quite different and yet the same,” thought Nicholas, looking at her
him was no such great honor after all, and that if he loved Natásha he


husband. Natásha on the contrary had at once abandoned all her witchery,
If in a thousand years even one man in a million could act freely, that

astounded.
colonel of forty to whom Denísov had introduced him.
part in it, but also by the joyful expression on the faces of soldiers,
as usual, independently of and apart from political friendship or enmity
actions for which they blame him (the Holy Alliance, the restoration of


CHAPTER IV
the streets soldiers in various uniforms walked or ran confusedly in


After staggering into Smolénsk which seemed to them a promised land, the
that lay before her.
excitement and to being unaccustomed to speak of abstract matters in
Borís. “He wanted to thank you himself.”
position of the Shevárdino Redoubt. That redoubt was quite senseless
yet understanding what the latter was telling her.
movements of the baggage trains of the entire army along the Krems-Znaim
“Thank you very much, I will go on alone,” said Prince Andrew,
CHAPTER XII
“Oh, I am so happy!” she replied, smiled through her tears, bent
thinking about you. Why are you going?”


With regard to legal matters, immediately after the fires he gave orders
flushed and his eyes gleamed with resolution and anger.
tell me,” he added with studied carelessness as if it had only just
that dread of beaten tracks, and wish to express itself in a manner
“that the Emperor will meet me and give me an order as he would to any
talking to him about the first sitting of the Council of State to be
countess and Sónya, and a fourth held the whole of the gossamer garment
to him, he felt flattered that, after what had happened, “Uncle”
a little earth crumbled from the bank under the horse’s hind hoofs.
“Well, good night,” said Natásha.

historian is again obliged to fall back on power—the force he had
“Have you any letters of hers? Any letters?” he said, moving toward
Napoleon, riding to Valúevo on the twenty-fourth, did not see (as the

her benefactors only to torture her the more painfully; she felt jealous
her in.
stood with wide-open eyes and mouths, straining with all their strength,

right hand, which was lying palm downwards, a wax taper had been thrust
enjoyed the beauty of his companion, was absorbed in his mastery of the

very pleased. Vasílich, you’ll see to it. Just unload one or two carts.
insignificant tool of history who never anywhere, even in exile, showed
“That was a Daniel Cooper!” exclaimed Márya Dmítrievna, tucking up
he was reputed to be clever and very well read, and secondly because by

The troops again began to move, and two battalions of the Nóvgorod and
crossed himself and kissed the icon. There was a look of tenderness, for



Natásha was calmer but no happier. She not merely avoided all external
“Sell me the missis,” said another soldier, addressing the German,
Balashëv was only two horses’ length from the equestrian with the
“Ah... a wonderful, a matchless people!” said Kutúzov; and he closed his
came out—wearing a velvet coat with a single star on his breast,
or allow it, but I don’t exact compensation either. One can’t get on
inflammable material on the bridge must be reinspected.”
couple to enter the circle. Prince Andrew was one of the best dancers of
even more careful of her appearance than when she was unmarried, and
crackling of wood fires near and afar, merged into one tremulous rumble.
I dare say, is braver than any of them. He says nothing about his
From the expression of his animated face the woman saw that this man
“Bonaparte...” began Dólokhov, but the Frenchman interrupted him.
Those standing behind noticed what a speaker omitted to say and hastened
The dreadful news of the battle of Borodinó, of our losses in killed and
evidently giving vent to the sounds in the same way that one stretches
the right flank and the French were already advancing, were engaged
meekness, love, and self-sacrifice—all this now shone in those radiant
him there, that force alone gave them the right to demand answers
Toward the end of 1806, when all the sad details of Napoleon’s

Borís lodged with another adjutant, the Polish Count Zhilínski.
French) to Prince Vasíli. “It’s not as at Annette’s * receptions
these two things and took more fortresses than Kámenski and made them
her eyes but casting side glances at the newcomers, had turned her cup
“It must be daylight soon,” said he, yawning, and went away.
was stone-still, like the moon and its light and the shadows. Prince
suggesting to him that the sublime moment having been too long drawn out



not see herself. She listened to the sounds in the hall. When she saw
him disputing in whispers and one of them insisting that he should be
at her and at the crack in the pantry door, and it seemed to her that
“In Moscow?” he said in a questioning tone. “Yes, in Moscow. Good-by!”

To Bolkónski so many people appeared contemptible and insignificant
grieved him and yet he was pleased.
“My dear,” said Anna Mikháylovna to her son, “I know from a
Well, mon cher, what are you doing personally?”

ten minutes. And that it will not be too dull, here is the dear count
as a veranda.
remembered the Masonic vow in which each Brother promised to devote
Pétya was carried out like a log and laid in the larger of the two
same she rose.

someone, and the torturing pain in his abdomen caused Prince Andrew to
of them. He hurried to find the family of that civil servant in order to
forestalled, my dear! It was thought of long ago. It is done in all the
snatching away the pistol and throwing it down, ran up to the officer
“No, why disturb the old fellow?” said the countess. “Besides,
After Prince Andrew, Borís came up to ask Natásha for a dance, and

There was no need to say more: Julie’s face shone with triumph and
velvet gown with a high collar, came into the room beaming with

of everyone, and the innumerable committees and commissions of whose
make a splendid princess!”
of his mouth and winking at the count.
Pierre was so deep in thought that he did not hear the question. He was
now necessary that man, governed by his senses, should find in virtue
In general the trait of Speránski’s mentality which struck Prince
accounts is a poor creature.”
Princess Mary’s embarrassment on her people’s account was quite
to west and for the refixing of national frontiers as Kutúzov had been
Her lip descended. She brought her face close to her sister-in-law’s
on him. The Empress’ chamberlain invited him to see Her Majesty. The

Adjutant General Wolzogen, the man who when riding past Prince Andrew
“You may punt,” he said.

sways the world. Think this over and I will come to you again.”
“The Elder? What do you want with him?...” asked Karp.
sides and, holding his gloves in his hand and walking with an effort
now with the Swiss tutor Dessalles, and showing an unnatural animation,
On the contrary, the army had never under the best material conditions
Her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up, giving her not a


of the river, and for a long time did not notice the killed and wounded,
see the borzois, nor the ground over which he went: he saw only the

love him all the more, but Nicholas now considered himself unworthy of

secretly regretting this, saw only the dark side.
to her father unobserved by her mother. The dark-eyed little girl boldly
some thirty paces from Kutúzov, talking to Borís.
commander in chief from among such a mass of troops!
“And I only...”
improvement of the human race by striving for such purification. Which
for the welfare of Russia. In Prince Andrew’s eyes Speránski was the
concealing his unvarying emotion he would press his cheek against his

for Petersburg two days later. Everybody was celebrating the victory,
“Yes, always first both on the grassland and here,” answered Rostóv,
And she was right,” said Countess Mary with a happy smile.
Then Denísov’s voice was heard shouting farther and farther away.

pictures of the future had given him pleasure. But with Princess Mary,
“Here are her letters and her portrait,” said he.


down on a sofa near the silver samovar, as if all she was doing was a
foresee everything and avert the general course of events, and it is
did not draw closer to Sónya, but rather drifted away from her. She was


the room, to the corner darkened by the icons that hung there.
he wanted to know what Natásha thought of it.

Hélène’s box was filled and surrounded from the stalls by the most
of his regiment, when he recognized red-haired Deméntyev and saw the
that he was nevertheless willing to negotiate. But he had begun talking,

commissariat, and the regiment had marched some seven hundred miles.
sake. His means increased rapidly; serfs from neighboring estates came
“Short and energetic!” he remarked when he had read over the
long.

Then all at once she remembered the tortures of suspense she had
the French had offered to move him from the men’s to the officers’ shed,
“Of course she will!” whispered Natásha, but did not finish...
duelist, who was living with Anatole. Pierre smiled, looking about him
“But, my dear sir,” said Nesvítski as he drew up, taking off his
Just then Count Bezúkhov was announced. Husband and wife glanced at one
Mary stop short on the threshold.
never reach absolute inevitability.
The horses’ croups began to sway in the front line. Rook pulled at the
“You’re a clever fellow! From the cold indeed! Why, it was hot. If it
enemy.
“But all that is only life’s setting, the real thing is love—love! Am I
A thaw had set in, it was muddy and cold, the ice on the river broke,
no longer looked at the French but paid attention to the sight-seers and
France so dear to his heart, died a lingering death on that rock and
“Comtesse, à tout péché miséricorde,” * said a fair-haired young man
officers ran after and around them shouting, “Hurrah!”
under the table.
physical privation and strain he had suffered as prisoner until after

of them were. The boy, thrusting his cold hands into his pockets and
coat and cap for Pierre, and promised to get him the pistol next day.
laughter led by Natásha. Both partners stood still, breathing heavily

other causes that adapted themselves to the event that was happening or
This modern branch of mathematics, unknown to the ancients, when dealing
reception room if he wished to see him. Borís thanked him and went to
As soon as he reached Moscow, Prince Andrew had received from his
seemed to him insincere; he did not know how to judge all these affairs
“This is my niece,” said the count, introducing Sónya—“You don’t know
Next day the imperial gentleman-in-waiting, the Comte de Turenne, came
history deliberately avoid seeing that this flank march cannot be
“Oh, what sleep—?” said the countess, waking up just as she was dropping

fingers.
suddenly flared up again brightly, lighting up with strange distinctness
“I don’t think anything, only I don’t understand this...”
appreciate at a glance her superiority to the plain, badly dressed,
readiness to give anything asked of him (he received the allowance

Ryazán provinces, and that if they retreated on Nízhni the army would
at five o’clock. There were no ladies present except Speránski’s
The Battle of Borodinó, with the occupation of Moscow that followed it
“I have only my cap to pin on.”
else,” replied Anna Pávlovna.

holding high her fifty-year-old head with its gray curls, she stood

“You, Bolkónski, don’t know,” said Bilíbin turning to Prince
“Yes, exactly; the left flank is now extremely strong.”
opinion.
of the meal and was certain that there was some secret between her
he was told in Russian, German, and Czech by the crowd of fugitives who
that all that occupied them was a mere frivolous trifle unworthy of
from the apes. They say this, not at all suspecting that thousands of
severely. “You don’t wish to apologize, but, man, it’s not only to
sleepless nights he did just what he reproached those younger generals
pity the animals too. Eh, the rascal! Now you’ve curled up and got warm,
familiar.
voice addressing the publican. “What have you killed a man for, you
that is, by his wishes which Natásha tried to guess. Their way of
well.”
The bells in the Krémlin were ringing for vespers, and this sound
he made himself when going into battle, and he was more amiable to the
Four weeks had passed since Pierre had been taken prisoner and though
needed.
“Ugh! I don’t like that fellow,” he said, regardless of the
    CHAPTER III

“Women, women! Women’s fuss!” muttered Alpátych to himself and started
button of his waistcoat.
fixed on two saddles and covered with a horsecloth, a small samovar was
shutters the moonlight, as if it had long been watching for this, burst
“Let’s come, quick, quick!” And with a glance round, she smiled at
“Your honor, your honor! A courier.”
eldest who was reading—the one who had met Anna Mikháylovna. The
another one hundredth, and so on forever. This problem seemed to
the seal of her letter. It was from her most intimate friend from
announced that she was going to see Prince Nicholas Bolkónski to have
such a nation,” he said to Pierre. “You, who have suffered so from the
the apple fell because he wanted to eat it and prayed for it. Equally
consolation of her life. This comforting dream and hope were given her
smiling. “Though she’s a lady, she’s very fond of hunting.”
and quite contrary to his usual character and said disagreeable things
continued Nicholas. “We must hope for the best, and I am sure...”
orderly, running behind the cart and fumbling in the back of it.
began reading. The old prince, now and then using abbreviations, wrote
income which was said to amount to five hundred thousand rubles a year,

Early in the morning of the twelfth of June he came out of his tent,
this time, he repeatedly says that he was then actuated by two important
Telyánin.
while we, on the other hand, with our left wing by far outflank his
weak, unentrenched Russian wing?”

Here Prince Hippolyte paused, evidently collecting his ideas with
everything is green already.... How early! The birches and cherry and
maneuvers, or encounters with the perishing enemy. Dokhtúrov went to


smeared with something!”
An elderly sergeant who had approached the officer while he was giving

At dinner, having placed Balashëv beside him, Napoleon not only treated
walk, we are unconscious of any contradiction. The degree of freedom and
“Who are they? Why are they here? What do they want? And when will
engaging the cogwheels.
replied that it would be more than enough for him and that he gave his
up from both sides. Everyone crowded to the window, the Englishman in
and emotion, as if justifying themselves: “Well, whatever he may have
commander in chief.
“Yes, that was fine,” said Rostóv, smiling.


from their positions, they could not have made this last effort, for all
against the muslin of the curtain.
was in his place, waiting.
Vasíli had only acquired by imitating other parents.

range and wipe them out?” These were the questions each man of the
every advantage. What receptions we had in Poland! What dinners and
He looked at her without moving and saw that she wanted to draw a
CHAPTER III

Princess Mary sat alone in her room listening to the sounds in the
Natásha.

Lauriston and Barthélemi having been sent, and by the reports of the
all as they should be? That’s right! The great thing is the serving,


this, will they let it pass? He, your father, I know him... if he
and all His mercy to one who is blind, or who shuts his eyes that he may

complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C
others still empty.

will give my life, anything, to put you at ease,” said Nicholas. “I
Davout’s troops, in whose charge were the prisoners, were crossing the
clock. One wheel slowly moved, another was set in motion, and a third,
killed and if I have a son, do not let him be taken away from you—as I
room with the inkstand in her hand.
think the regiment is not a bad one, eh?”

The fifth of November was the first day of what is called the battle of

“I quite understand,” answered Princess Mary, with a sad smile.
has no right to stop in his search for the cause. The man who explains

“Going?” And he went on writing.
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax

(his “bridge” in court relations), were silent. Pfuel only snorted

brother Hippolyte told me about your goings on. Oh!” and she shook her

is the content. Inevitability is the form.
“Ah? You’re Pwince Bolkónski? Vewy glad to make your acquaintance! I’m
spilled on dry ground both the dry ground and the water disappear and

wishing to show her connections and knowledge of what went on in


right. Come here!”
entered whom Anna Pávlovna had been waiting for and wished to convert,
The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was an anecdote, then current,

same and always a fraud? There is no spring, no sun, no happiness! Look
long-sustained shouts. Afterwards when one of the generals addressed
affairs or a definite explanation of the meaning of the force producing
different—an unpleasant character and has not the same intelligence.
took her hand and begged her forgiveness, without knowing what for.

have moved his army to the Kalúga road long before reaching Filí, and

Countess Mary, “but he forgets that we have other duties nearer to us,
to have a tête-à-tête with Natásha—Mademoiselle Bourienne
words to her such as her father had uttered before his death, and
went out, following her aunt.
So-and-so and So-and-so did and said this and that, and that Hélène

gaze drooped his eyes sadly and again took to twirling his snuffbox.

going on at the back porch. A woman, bent with age, with a wallet on her
sought in himself either remorse for having angered his father or regret
reins and started of his own accord.

Andrew most was his absolute and unshakable belief in the power and
“Sire,” he said, with respectful playfulness, “they are only afraid lest
“And do you feel sad here?” Pierre inquired.
something else—in the expression of face and tone of voice of those who
not right, Monsieur Pierre?” said he, growing animated. “Another glass?”

“I can’t get a moment’s peace.... Mary, is that you? Why did you bring
broad-browed head hanging down and the bitten stick between her jaws,


“Rostóv! How d’you do? We missed one another,” he said, and could

a short pause, “but everyone lives in his own way. You lived for

would have been clear and complete. One might believe or disbelieve

beside him. This hussar, with a grave face and without a smile or a
also remembered his difficulty in procuring a conveyance and horses, and
as usual. It was a hot July day. Even at ten o’clock, when the Rostóvs
hollows and snow-covered pools of water.

at once transferred to the Guards as a cornet, had been educated from
When they had emptied the samovar, Rostóv took a pack of cards and

The Mason remained silent for a long time, evidently considering.
in society, nor as he had for a long time, and at one time rapturously,

acquaintances, who had so often dined and danced at his house and had so

rights, the relations of husband and wife and their freedom and rights,

side.
would be renewed, no one—least of all Natásha and Prince Andrew—spoke of
Pávlovna: “Educate this bear for me! He has been staying with me
“It is for the reasson, my goot sir,” said he, speaking with a
which emerged from a dark, gold-embroidered, gauze gown, talked to her
library, and he made it a rule to read through all the books he bought.
    CHAPTER II

sake that the latter might say something he would afterwards regret.
“What’s your name?”
“The highest wisdom and truth are like the purest liquid we may wish
gentlemen of the Emperor’s suite ran down the stairs and went to their
and being, as a malcontent, much interested in what was occurring in
Was he going to rebuild? When was he going to Petersburg and would he
did not want or could not carry away with them. Austrian column guides

wishing to say something or at least to meet his eye. But Rostopchín did
cock, but the elder members glanced severely at the wit, making him
“Must one die like a dog?” said he.
a look at you, your excellency.”
we’ll fire off some cannon! But this sort of thing seems done
laughing joyfully and shouting “Hurrah!”
intimately regretted that he had died so young, leaving a pregnant wife

edge. Everything grew bright and glittered. And with that light, and as
government allows it. Not merely is it not hostile to government, but

“Natásha, I am afraid for you!”
“Go over that way, they’re there. It’s she! She kept on lamenting and
And Pierre’s soul was dimly but joyfully filled not by the story itself
unembarrassed smile, “I was just trying to explain our position to
a shaggy cap, who was standing sentinel before his tent and had drawn

“So tell them that I shall await a reply till the tenth, and if by the
they were accommodated, entreating the servants to try to get them
small talk, instead of turning on the weather and mutual acquaintances,

The officer flourished his arm and hastily rode away.
Prince Andrew, “it will give you time to be sure of yourself. I ask
reporting matters to the higher command, to attack and seize that
such as his companion and himself, “but probably they would not dare to
glittering eyes rapturously turned toward her, and especially his neck,
different tones. Rostóv reined in his horse, whose spirits had risen,
unable to overcome or conceal his groundless antipathy to the man.
beauty and her dress. Soon after their arrival Mademoiselle George went
close was the bond that united him to Denísov and the whole regiment.
traveler, also detained for lack of horses.

carried away a threatening cloud during the hay harvest he would return
day long. At the battle of Borodinó, when Bagratión was killed and nine
Pierre got up and, having told them to harness and overtake him, went on
“You thought!” shouted the prince, his words coming more and more
(1) What is power?
to dinner. I suppose he won’t go?” she continued, turning to the
“Here, in that house,” answered the adjutant.
raise him. But as soon as he thought of what he should say, he felt that
anything for his happiness! And my affairs are in such a bad way that my
felt himself at home in a quiet haven. In Moscow he felt at peace, at
the conception of the infinitely small, and the resulting geometrical
We women, Prince,” and she smiled tenderly, “always know how to say
Pávlograd regiment; the other, all the rest. And the rest was no
was a young horse Telyánin had sold to Rostóv.)
they descended into the hollow where the Cossacks awaited them.
“Filez, filez!” * Dólokhov kept saying, having adopted this expression
the customary place before an icon of the Blessed Virgin, let into the
“You want a coffeepot, don’t you?” he asked the esaul. “I bought a
Prince Andrew entered a plain tidy room and saw at the table a man of
courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, Anna Pávlovna

family, she thought it her duty to go to see them. But remembering her
“Lads! here’s to our Sovereign, the Emperor, and victory over
“On that day I always go to pay my devotions to the relics of Prince
tattered inhabitants, and the sick and drunken soldiers wandering about.
While Dólokhov had been disputing with Denísov what should be done with



asleep unexpectedly in the daytime, but at night, lying on his bed
which was almost unentrenched.
The crowd moved on again. Nesvítski realized that it was a cannon ball.
remark to him, pointing to the gallant Ápsherons.
first appearance in society. Anna Pávlovna greeted him with the nod she
“Count!... Don’t ruin a young fellow... here is this wretched money,
saluting, and this sound rapidly came nearer along the whole extended
As he had done on their first meeting at Kochubéy’s, Speránski

After breakfast, which was her best time, Márya Dmítrievna sat down in
and daggers, with trousers tucked inside their high boots and with belts
jokes, sit on the cannon, and meanwhile a French battalion gets to
of columns from Russia, of some victory gained by the Austrians, and of

expression—the same man who had rushed out of the wattle shed. At that

cup of vodka for the men from me,” he added so that the soldiers
But just as the subject of every science is the manifestation of this
who ducked low as a cannon ball flew over.

and wrote a few words on a large sheet of paper folded in four).
    CHAPTER XXIII
father as he opened the door—speaking from under the filmy skirt which
there over the whole of that blue expanse, to right and left of the
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
“Where to?”
Dron looked intently at the princess while she was speaking.
avoiding gardens and enclosures, going over new and unknown ground, and
was abroad; so Pierre had not the opportunity to spend his nights as he
them the order to march, thereby indicating that he intended to lead


And having put him on his honor not to repeat anything she told him,

a confirmation of his thoughts, and after a few minutes’ reflection
a service of prayer. All that Denísov had said was clever and to the


can’t understand that all those feelings they prize so—all our feelings,

But that man, so heedless of his words, did not once during the whole
too, without ever being wronged.”
that those men with whom you have ridden round the position not only
self-possession mingled at that moment in Rostóv’s soul.
and Natásha, following the direction of that look, saw an exceptionally
will do so.... So you see there can be no question about—” said Nicholas
From Moscow to Vyázma the French army of seventy-three thousand men not


take a single step till it has chosen one of two things: either a return
especially to the young.
you wish, eh?”
Súkharev tower, do you remember?”
“Yes, yes!” cried Natásha opening her eyes wide, and vaguely recalling
“You will, of course, command it yourself?” said Julie, directing a sly,
becomes.
was too far separated from our right flank and the cavalry were all
The member of the Hofkriegsrath looked at him severely but, seeing the

forward from page to page,” he thought. “I used to understand what
prisoners if they surrender according to the rules of strategy and
side to side, moving his ears as if asking: “Isn’t it time to begin


had been drawn up and sent to Kutúzov for his guidance. Though this plan
tears.
impossible...”

grieving at the misfortunes of our common cause, or we are merely

took him along with him.
one saw her. Rostóv, holding his breath, looked round at the borzois.

    * “Long live the king.”

“What is it? Some new relics?” asked Prince Andrew.
There was a rapid patter of bare feet, and an unseen hand opened the
“I shall probably die before you. So remember, these are my memoirs;


    BOOK NINE: 1812
Pierre who had been regarded with patronizing condescension when he was
to have been there to show that fellow Bolkónski that connection with


life, the destiny of man, and the laws which govern the world. But who
Tsarévich should not be with the army. Do you know what he said to the
a third was being helped by an hussar to mount his horse. In front, the

CHAPTER XIX
the fleeting glance they threw at the riders and in the malevolent

all surprised at something when there was nothing to be surprised at.

die. I love life—I love this grass, this earth, this air....” He thought
various officials, old and young, military and civilian, who were there.
thou art wise because thou couldst utter those blasphemous words,” he
thoughts and feelings that had formerly seemed so important. It did
after losing half their men were retreating in disorderly confused
“No, but do promise! I won’t let you go! My dear benefactor...”
Pétya. “Vasílich told me. I consider...”
she sent for her husband and, when he came, tried briefly and coldly to
fly away into the sky, everyone must know me, so that my life may not be
The third and most incomprehensible thing is that people studying
He had heard that the Rostóvs were at Kostromá but the thought of
his master, “The count has come!” and Denísov, who had been asleep
comfort. It was evident, too, that he was in the best of spirits that
Borís smiled.
The only conception that can explain the movement of the locomotive is
faculty, so invaluable in society, of composure and imperturbable
“Shelter?” Pierre repeated. “The German for shelter is Unterkunft.”
tidied themselves up after their journey, Márya Dmítrievna kissed them

rights of the conquering nation have increased to the detriment of the
study the common, infinitesimally small elements by which the masses are

The chief steward, a very stupid but cunning man who saw perfectly

nothing. I am very amiable and have a caustic wit,” continued Prince
“Oh, I am really in despair at what has occurred,” said Pierre rapidly,
“No, he thinks only of himself,” muttered the princess without

often come nowadays as it is, and this girl of mine,” said the count
set to work once more.

getting on in years, uselessly and joylessly passing the best years of
“Well, all I can make out is that everything is abominable,
Rostóv.
timidly, into the anteroom, then hiding behind one another they pushed
The two young men, the student and the officer, friends from childhood,
ordinary conditions of life were nowhere to be found.
left hand and turned her, the only sound audible, apart from the
grown furious, now at Borís, now at Bolkónski. “Yes, many stories!
In their attitude toward him could still be felt both uncertainty as
foot to the other she ran like a kitten the few steps to the door and

crowd of French soldiers stood around him and were searching him.
if His Majesty would let him have another division.
lifted in childlike happiness.
to appear calm added: “And don’t imagine I have said this in a
a host welcomes an honored guest. He reported that his regiment had
observing and the less complex the character and mind of the man in
for her. When the little princess had grown accustomed to life at Bald
the militia—we can leave to the supreme authority....”
After that the generals began to disperse with the solemnity and


reading many historical works cannot help doubting whether this new
love for Natásha was unpleasant to him and he had not once been to see
because Pierre pointed her out to him and because she was the first
Hessian boots. His short hair had evidently just been brushed, but one
asked Rostóv, with a contemptuous smile.

“Nicholas, what a fine dog Truníla is! He knew me,” said Natásha,
They looked at each other with dismayed and embarrassed faces. He tried

eagerly from the balcony toward the porch. Rostopchín, coming out there
eyes inquiringly on him.
“Mind your own business,” an old sergeant shouted at them. “If they’ve
Recognizing the falsity of this view of history, another set of
from the cooperation of all the other coincident causes—to occasion the
It was true that a view over nearly the whole Russian position and the

smallest speck for the image of a man or of a coffin, she saw nothing.
At first Prince Andrew read with his eyes only, but after a while,

indicative of dissipation and the exercise of authority.
Turkey by means of restless, plodding, and rather vainglorious and
In reply Borís wrote these lines:
countess has been to Mass at the Razumóvskis’ and heard the new prayer.

filling their bags. On seeing Alpátych, Ferapóntov turned to him:
there is nothing in life but you, and to suffer with you is the greatest
his feet, and again turning over he fell asleep immediately.

forces of Western Europe crossed the Russian frontier and war began,


of Count Bezúkhov’s death. She said the count had died as she would

older visitors. They now, stretching themselves after sitting so long,
Dólokhov slowly straightened his bent knee, looking straight with his

good as another, that could be made as long as it was quite unknown
of that day in his usual way. He examined the bailiff’s accounts of
“Vivarika! Vif-seruvaru! Sedyablyaka!” repeated the soldier, flourishing
by the guerrillas in Spain, by the mountain tribes in the Caucasus, and
and angry faces struggled for the mop: how differently do those clouds
besides the look of joyful emotion it had worn yesterday while telling
only sure happiness in life.”
a keg, filled one after another the canteen lids held out to him. The
felt coat, stretched his legs, and set his cap straight. The head of the
Bogdánich knows how things are done.”
inevitability governing the actions of these people is clearly defined
A circle soon formed round Speránski, and the old man who had talked

Rostóv reined in his horse, and his eyes sought his foe to see whom he
“I think it is delightful,” he said, referring to a diplomatic note that


things and to question Pierre. The questions put by these two kept the
had regarded with surprise and amusement at Otrádnoe, was just the
struck one of his small hands energetically with the other. “Yes, I
“Either black is particularly becoming to her or she really has greatly
absorbed all his mental powers. All else was to him only life’s
Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic
being too much loved; and besides, you are free, you could throw it
could give her. But until death came she had to go on living, that is,
Prince Andrew dimly realized that all this was trivial and that he had
And Nicholas again kissed her hand.

battle—suddenly without any reason turned off to the left onto the new
hands....”
militiaman and having had rather too much at the pub—heard that Napoleon

Prince Andrew arrived at Bennigsen’s quarters—a country gentleman’s
A broad staircase led straight up from the entry, and to the right he

decline, but took the note quietly and thanked her.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the



come and sing.”
attacked the men collecting wood in the copse. It was no longer possible
to hear of this, but Prince Andrew was firm. He came every day to the
midwife.
bare. The other, whose appearance particularly struck Pierre, was a
to death and a minister of that same law of love and forgiveness, a
hungry, exhausted men would have to detain for days the whole enemy army

thoughts rather than the trend of the conversation—“and that’s a

When returning from his leave, Rostóv felt, for the first time, how
being said, thought, and felt that day by its rider.

Dron made no answer but sighed deeply.

him a petition from some peasant men or women who had appealed to her
Next day Count Rostóv returned from his estate near Moscow in time for
folded shirt.

was sitting on the floor of her dismantled room with dresses, ribbons,
    CHAPTER IX
lying there for nearly a month, and says the peasant, ‘they lie as white
pleasure at the sound of the singing and the sight of the dancing
he, as if bragging of having been frightened.
For some thirty years Boguchárovo had been managed by the village Elder,


Someday I will tell you about our parting and all that was said then.

“Well now, isn’t she a fool!” shouted the prince, pushing the book
“Oh, that’s it!” said Rostóv, evidently thinking of something
Natásha blushed and laughed.
“And what were you going to say?”
diplomatic career in comparison with Pierre’s happiness. The old
Niemen when the enemy was already at the Dnieper, but Princess Mary,
same time more seriously than did Count Bezúkhov. Natásha unconsciously
the middle of the room and, pressing the head of a pin till it hurt her
Toward four o’clock in the afternoon Murat’s troops were entering

pressure lay his only hope of salvation.
daughter, entered the drawing room, their dresses rustling.
“This is the first act. Those that follow are naturally increasingly

to him. We search, but none are to be found. The field marshal grows
table linen, he would call Dmítri Vasílevich, a man of good family and
of wounded pride, and a hope of glory. “And should there be nothing
northerly or more southerly route (say by the road Kutúzov afterwards
countess’ house.
which the doctors recommended long ago. I hope it will cure him. You
Princess Mary looked inquiringly at her father. He was examining the
front of the infantry, who had to wait.
talking to himself. And he spent the night on a bed made up for him

vividly imagined what awaited it and the part he would have to
science, poetry, music, love, friendship, hatred, and passions—went on


this force as a power inherent in heroes and rulers. In their narration


know, I am very far from having military tastes, but in these times no
pleased him were wrong and that he must go to Petersburg and settle his
    CHAPTER V
violet into gray and milky white, and “boom!” came the report a second
is, do you see him? I’ve seen him twice, as I see you now. The little
Moscow, a thin, sallow, tattered French soldier came up to the door of


once was—did not struggle, and perhaps she was right. Nothing has been
His daughter, Princess Hélène, passed between the chairs, lightly
illness, and so the sound of her voice surprised and delighted him. He
talk to one another about him. They felt that they could not express in
One day toward the end of December Natásha, pale and thin, dressed in a
influence than anyone else on the staff, had begun to avoid him, Kutúzov
Prince Andrew’s calm manner of treating everybody, his extraordinary

“There he is, always losing everything!” remarked the countess.
trustee. This Marshal was Count Ilyá Rostóv, and in the middle of May
“I know your outlook,” said the Mason, “and the view of life you
Anatole had lately moved to Dólokhov’s. The plan for Natalie
the stern shrewd old man (himself a relic of the past century) with his
mind: the idea occurred to her of jumping onto the edge of the box and

    * “And hurrah for the whole world!”
subjection of the will of a nation to some chosen man and the subjection


little Nicholas some symptoms of her father’s irritability. However
A smile of pleasure never left Natásha’s face. She felt happy and as
friend...”
face, she blushed and came rapidly up to him.
own life—is just what makes the choice of occupation insolubly difficult
taken place, did not affect him, and even seemed quite insignificant. He
another—a childlike, kindly, even rather silly look, which seemed to

and brought with them, Ramballe invited Pierre to share his dinner, and

the Niemen—only the Niemen?” repeated Napoleon, looking straight at
smile of satisfaction and presented a strange appearance among the
“Why so?” asked Prince Andrew. “To kill a vicious dog is a very
woods, there burst from the muskets small cloudlets that had no time
pace.
that all was now over. The terrified wolf pressed back her ears and
to weep. Now it happened that in the group was the very man who had
making demands on her, tearfully implored her to sacrifice herself
CHAPTER XVI
face where it was rising. But besides this there was something else of
lips about the amusements of the highest Petersburg society, recalling
“Yes, if having obtained power, without availing himself of it to
unfinished bit of nibbled sugar, and asked if anything more would be
only thing that could save Russia, while on the French side, despite
yesterday, yesterday, and today,” thought Sónya. “But it can’t be
talking broken Russian to the servants, but was still the same narrowly
tell the little countess!”
aide-de-camp.
that is, her husband whom she had to keep so that he should belong
had run up and was looking down on the stretcher.
I don’t speak of Anatole, your youngest. I don’t like him,” she
straight at Prince Andrew with wide-open eyes.

“Before Moscow!” repeated Napoleon, and inviting M. de Beausset, who was
realized what had happened, namely the loss of our position on the left
“The divine mercy is inexhaustible! Unction is about to be
also of his object, and why he considered it better to risk his life
man to him. He wished to talk to him himself. Several adjutants galloped
and of the sturdy young fellow seated on the box was all that could
and having written a letter to the Emperor Alexander in which he
house of moderate size, situated on the very banks of the river. Neither
There were three operating tables in the tent. Two were occupied, and
now fully devoted to him and who must rejoice at his former master’s
 and     8 guns of Friant’s and Dessaix’s divisions
As always happens when women lead lonely lives for any length of time

and tone. In reply to his last question Pierre again explained who Makár
indication was that three out of their huge retinue disappeared
tone of voice. “Come here, my friend...” and she ominously tucked
On his return to Moscow from the army, Nicholas Rostóv was welcomed
“Oh, you Guards!” said Rostóv. “I say, send for some wine.”
on to. But as soon as a storm arises and the sea begins to heave and
“At one draught, or he loses!” shouted a fourth.
There in Moscow she was deprived of her greatest pleasures—talks with
and on all their faces he recognized the same eagerness that filled his
expression, though many of them knew that what he was saying was a lie
firm faces surrounded his benefactor on all sides. But though they were
him. It was cold and uncanny in the rapid current in the middle of the
and Sónya, and hastened to inquire after “Mamma’s” health.
Russian commanders. Here besides the law of retrospection, which regards
senseless cry, “Cut off!” that is so terrible in battle, and that
lad jumped awkwardly back into the room, tripping over his spurs.
tenderly sad voice, she said:
you will let me win this ten, or beat it.”
Kutúzov never talked of “forty centuries looking down from the
dress her would prolong their banter and insistence. She flushed, her
“Oh, Denísov is quite different,” replied Nicholas, implying that
position, straightened himself, adjusted his feet, and leaned back again

An adjutant came now to inform him that the fire of two hundred guns
chiffonier like that and how we had a dispute about it.” (At the mention

though shy, went on carefully executing her steps. Denísov did not

always saw and noticed everything, arranged that she and Madame Schoss
In answer to questions with which he was greeted, the courier made a
A few minutes later the footman returned with Dessalles, who brought
diable à quatre...” *
“Smart lads! Only fit for a fair!” said one.

or ribbon. For me tomorrow means this: a Russian army of a hundred
beetles, Prince Andrew noticed that there was not a soul about and that
person. While talking to Princess Mary he continually looked round as
patiently?” thought she, looking at Sónya, who also came in quite
in connection with the affairs of the Ryazán estate of which he was
his face, began to talk—as one who has long had something on his mind
instructions his father had sent and taking the correspondence and his
CHAPTER X
money prepared for use in Russia should be delivered as quickly as
the people is unconditionally transferred to historical persons, and
also. Yes, my opinion, and only my opinion,” added Prince Bolkónski,

“What force! What a style!” was uttered in approval both of reader and
matter! Abroad no one will know anything about it. Isn’t that so? And
not like us sinners of the line,” cried Rostóv, with martial swagger
Prince Vasíli a third time. “How absent-minded you are, my dear
column coming up to meet the Ápsherons.
“There, leave Bruin alone; here’s a bet on.”
and coming up to Prince Andrew took him along to the other end of the
Murat approached the interpreter and told him to ask where the Russian
it on something, and told him to hold a pair of compasses to his left

throwing out his chest.
asked herself, and she could not refrain from turning round. She looked
reflections on his success in Petersburg. At that moment it seemed to
all the strange new facts he had learned; but on reaching Orël he




Pierre’s hand to show that there was no need to ask the question. He
“A kindly old man but not up to much. And why do they stay on so long in
action, and in the company of well-known, elderly, and respected racing

Dólokhov’s second, and after dinner he discussed the arrangements for
harnessed. Four borzois with collars were pressing close to the wheels.
“What is a trick?” asked Princess Mary in surprise.

within. But Kutúzov evidently did not wish to enter that room till he
learned that Dólokhov the brawler, Dólokhov the bully, lived in Moscow
aides-de-camp, diplomatic officials, and a large number of foreigners,
descendants were weak men and they too ruled France badly. And they had

Reaching the large house near the Horse Guards’ barracks, in which
air, went out into the deserted streets lit by the clear light of dawn.
his knee, played with him, and looked round at Princess Mary. With a
The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefully
campaign but had subsequently been removed from the army by Kutúzov.
most recent bulletin. Glancing through the army orders, Pierre found in
Ilágin kept stealthily glancing at one another’s dogs, trying not
After reaching home Natásha did not sleep all night. She was tormented
a loud voice of command ordered them to put up the horses. Having done
there were factories and workshops, palaces and wealthy houses filled
soldier of forty—looked sternly at the singers and screwed up his
charge of three hospitals with more than four hundred patients! It’s
complete victory over the French. *

condemn dreamers; now that of a satirist, and laugh ironically at his
And he went on to inquiries about the Grand Duke and the state of his
of it. The count had the father fetched, but the fellow stuck to it.
“Yes... yes... Well, Michael Ivánovich,” he suddenly went on, raising
fine weather. A short, swarthy lieutenant colonel of hussars with thick
and felt their feelings. What they would have said and what they would
Silence ensued. The countess looked at her callers, smiling affably,
horsemen. Pierre also looked at them, trying to guess which of the
Listening to Bilíbin he was already imagining how on reaching the army
manure on well-kept plowland, lay from ten to fifteen dead and wounded
down.”
his strength in an effort to recover his senses, he moved a little, and
of the man she loved. Nicholas also noticed that look and, as if
Pierre, answering Natásha’s words, told her how intolerable it had been


state of things there, and spoke of the estimate an architect had made
When Telyánin had finished his lunch he took out of his pocket a double
all stared in timid bewilderment at the strange, long-haired commander
captain wiped his eyes and gave himself a shake, as if driving away the
the whole interest of the story, and we are still unable to accustom
The creditors who had so long been silent, restrained by a vague
sprang onto the box of the moving coach which jolted as it passed out


Vítebsk....”
off, and an hour later, Lavrúshka, the serf Denísov had handed over
someone and all at once that person vanishes there, into nowhere, and
or roasting themselves to death at the campfires, while carriages

orders from him were not now needed, that the whole affair, carefully
The score against him reached the fateful sum of forty-three thousand.
who had just returned from captivity and by an hussar orderly, left
Rostóv described Denísov’s appearance.
Bald Hills, while he himself needed no one and nothing. He used to
“So it seems you’re a hero, eh? Come now, what was this duel about?

He sighed.
with him.”


“Ah, you’re back?”
position now, Peter Nikoláevich...”
“Lavwúska!” he shouted loudly and angrily, “take it off,

The child moved slightly in his sleep, smiled, and rubbed his forehead
still why didn’t you capture him? So don’t be surprised if not only
nonsense!” He glanced at his watch. “It’s time!”
wet cloaks, but they did not sleep for a long time; now they exchanged
bewitchingly tender that he had not seen in her before. “Natásha,
beneath his dignity to give me satisfaction, then...”
fixed above his head. Then he took out a knife, cut something, closed

Emperor (we know how far commanding officers allow themselves to diverge
and roast goose or suckling pig. But in nothing in the house was the
tint in her complexion and especially in the color of her slender but


access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
“Well, that’s all!” said Kutúzov as he signed the last of the documents,
“You have seen? You have seen?...” Kutúzov shouted. Frowning and rising
the orders in the disposition was, or could be, executed. But in the
here, run away, bury myself somewhere?” passed through his mind. But
all the soldiers’ remarks related to the two young ones. Every face
at convenient moments between the words, shouting, “Be off! Never let
commander’s back and mimicked his every movement. Each time the



“Oh, what a formidable one!” said he. “A formidable one, eh?” he

up with one’s own life, before whom one was to blame and had hoped to
the girls’ educational establishments under the patronage of the Dowager
“We’ll make you dance as we did under Suvórov...,” * said
exchanged kisses with the landowner, with whom he was already on the
“You remember,” said Sónya with a solemn and frightened expression.
“May I ask you,” said Pierre, “what village that is in front?”
series of victories, and quite wrongly considered victorious by Russian
very much! I have promised myself not to serve again in the active
Rostóv looked at and listened listlessly to what passed before and
shouting: “Duport! Duport! Duport!” Natásha no longer thought this
advanced his horse’s chest against Balashëv, put his hand to his saber,
fastening his coat. When he had finished, he turned to Bezúkhov, and
together.”

went into a corner of the stage. The cymbals and horns in the orchestra
talking about me? Let us talk about you,” he added after a silence,

permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

stern expressions on the faces he had seen in passing, were lit up
movements of the bearers, and the cold listless gaze fixed itself upon
flee, considering himself lost. He pretends to fall into a swoon and
Sokólniki field, no longer thinking of what had occurred but considering

noise was heard which seemed to him louder than the most terrific
Andrew’s presence. He was ashamed to express his new Masonic views,

Prince Vasíli continued, forgetting for a moment that though at Hélène’s
have now become quite calm, quite calm.”
But that is all the same! ‘It is not I but the hand of Providence that
side of the activity of a leader expresses the nation’s life, we have

“Ke...” Zaletáev, brought out with effort: “ke-e-e-e,” he drawled,
Russia, he would have said that it was not his business to think about
culture evade it and answer something quite different. And as counters


to the conversation. Magnítski starting quizzing Stolýpin about his
“Do you know, that fat Pierre who sat opposite me is so funny!” said
unwell today? Eh? Afraid of the ‘minister’ as that idiot Alpátych
Princess Mary with a gay smile, as if inviting her to join in a laugh at
“The only thing that is hard for me... I will tell you the truth,
shouting with a hoarse voice.
longed. Sónya now was sixteen and she was very pretty, especially at
kind, sorrowful face, she suddenly understood the cause of his coldness.
crossed one on the other on her breast, and to him, too, her face seemed
had already done in that direction. If he were now to leave Moscow like
why not. To a proposal made by General Campan (who was to attack the


The man who had been ordered to go for ammunition stumbled against
affection for Kurágin—were sitting at tea in Dólokhov’s front

down on one of the tubs, picked it up.
they had entered Moscow.
gone and that his wife was no more. “Oh, how good, how splendid!”
The only young people remaining in the drawing room, not counting the
Soon after this, Ermólov moved up to Kutúzov and respectfully remarked:
“Satisfactory, indeed! Very satisfactory! Barbara Ivánovna told me today
get away as quickly as possible, she would not hear of leaving before
“Asleep, I think.”
me in choosing me for your second, if at this grave, this very
though many fell near him. He looked about him with a smile which did
which covered with snow, appeared on the landing where the footman
It was necessary to fight an unexpected battle at Smolénsk to save our

When all was ready, the sabers stuck in the snow to mark the barriers,
and girdles tightened, were taking leave of those remaining behind.
bustlingly searching for something.
“I don’t know anything about it,” said Pierre.

the sky, the dawn merging with the afterglow of sunset, was visible.
“Keep in step! Ah... those peasants!” shouted an officer, seizing by
quite natural, but on the other hand all her previous thoughts of her

That shoulder rose and fell rhythmically and convulsively, but spadefuls
an exemplary officer of twenty-two years’ service, who had never been
entrance to the dam raised his hand and opened his mouth to address
enthusiasm of that month of captivity, of those irrecoverable, strong,

He had Pierre at hand in Moscow and procured for him an appointment as
and the reports of a musket and of two cannon shots were heard

at?”
to Poland, forming the Holy Alliance, entrusting power to Arakchéev,
In the spring of 1809 he went to visit the Ryazán estates which had
district who ought to be arrested by a strong force—October 11.”
every now and then and muttering something to himself, and evidently
taken and after that, with no further battles, it is not Russia that
bad form, but here he felt it incumbent on him to astonish them all by
One shot struck a French soldier’s foot, and from behind the screens
cried with a feeling of loathing for herself.
couch or on the lounge chair in the drawing room and dozed there without
Dólokhov, an officer of the Semënov regiment, a notorious gambler and

    CHAPTER XIX
began speaking in a voice that faltered and trembled with emotion. This
“Well, that’s it then! You know that there is a there and there is a
hundred yards after that before he saw to his left, across the whole
place. The doctor was very much displeased about something and made a

“You couldn’t see a thing. How they shot at their own fellows!
“It’s plain that they have not all gone yet, Prince,” said
    CHAPTER X
of the people to their rulers, and that historical leaders have power
through the rooms a long time considering what she should do. Toward


man’s personality.
“Yes, yes,” muttered Pierre, looking with shining eyes at Prince Andrew.
morning, the lines were so near together that the men could see one
still was not in time to avoid them.
were turned against the ten-gun battery. Túshin’s companion officer
house lay behind a newly dug pond filled with water to the brink and

for it. The one thing that recalled the patriotic fervor everyone had
any that were at all serious, yet the French army ceased to exist. What
he had taken from his sister and another ten thousand borrowed with

began for the first, second, and third columns, which had gone down into
“I have not considered it right to conceal from your Serene Highness
Pierre with an amused smile, evidently in that cheerful mood of good
take in the meaning of his words.
with vexation that she was herself being judged and was judging others,
had been in attendance, considered young Prince Drubetskóy an invaluable
she used to have quarrels with the too indulgent count, that son who
feigned severity. “You spoil her, Ilyá,” she added, turning to her
The arrangement adopted when they started, that the officer prisoners
was being done was not his adjutant’s fault, and still not answering

same state of excitement as when she had slammed the door of her room.
them.”
in the immense importance of which she firmly believed.
back.”
old man’s bald head shining in the sun and seeing by the expression on

Captain von Toll chanced to ride to the same spot, and seeing the
Seeing Anna Mikháylovna and her son, Prince Vasíli dismissed the
slightly bruised. On the basis of these necessarily untrustworthy

The angry borzois whined and getting free of the leash rushed past the
“Kind...ly let—them—pass!”

possibility of love and happiness between Natásha and Pierre, and the
laws of reason.
and compelled to act under conditions of war unlike anything that had
the vicomte’s story. Prince Vasíli’s words frightened her, an
and fling me into a hole that I may not stink under their noses, and new
      20   30   40   50   60   70   80   90
    CHAPTER XIX
really because she disliked anyone interfering in what touched her love
in society, and those who met her there were not pleased with her
and scapegraces of Petersburg.

on the contrary, they stimulated his energy and determination.

to us, let yourself be guided, and you will at once feel yourself, as I
little Nicholas and his tutor, her old nurse, three maids, Tíkhon, and a
Italian to give her lessons.”
one is dead, I fancy. However, I’ll look up our list. We had a list.

period of time, however intelligible or incomprehensible the causes
sufficient, there must also be a possibility of doing it, and that

a man he disliked, those new thoughts had come to him which promised him
Nicholas blushed and was confused when people spoke to him about the
her needs. Only by a rare glance exchanged with a sad smile
the other end of Europe, with but one thought—to be worthy of their

view of the common calamity, the same feeling that had caused him to go


by the fact that Kutúzov evidently could not or would not understand the
another in the large hall and they whispered to one another. Then a
house before Mass.
that’s all!”
subject, but the count returned to his troubles.
distance than they had already traversed, before they reached the
would again have risen had not the prince still held her fast, “though
says we have got the French army between two fires; Michaud says that
“Gone to bed?” asked the prince.

French corps, and by way of reporting their intention to Kutúzov they
and said at Hélène’s what he should have said at Anna Pávlovna’s and
Bonaparte, and how badly the latter would fare now, especially if the
Prince Andrew, having reached the front line, rode along it. Our front
of men, reckoning those transporting and feeding the army—moved from the

nice youth! What a scoundrel! And she’s expecting him—expecting him
these topics were not merely uninteresting to Natásha, she positively
“Nicholas, have you come? Come here, dear!” called the old countess
Balashëv looked around him, awaiting the arrival of an officer from the
those words Kutúzov looked round. He was listening to the general’s


CHAPTER VII
courtiers, and by the Emperor himself, it occurred to one of the Polish
wiped away her tears, went resolutely up to Mademoiselle Bourienne,

head disconsolately, told the driver to turn into the yard, and stopped
along planks, while others stood about doing nothing.
hour to do so, and came out upon the square where the streets of the

Pierre said nothing; he looked fixedly at his friend with surprise. He

waited impatiently for Prince Andrew’s return from the commander in
“I am ordered to write a memorandum explaining why we are not
began to devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Mary should be
Moscow? They meant to leave for the country long ago. Natalie is quite
uttered those solemn words about saving a child; they saw in him only

‘We’ve lost, so let us run,’ and we ran. If we had not said that till
place and that he might now be lying, recovering or dying, alone among
true or not should make no difference to you, because...”


as often happens when one is talking, felt somehow that this companion
Moscow. In front rode a detachment of Württemberg hussars and behind

“No, one can’t hear them. They’d be firing if we had.”
“Sónya, you’ve read that letter?” she demanded.
made and highly valued. The old count came up to them and pressed
thought, he called Tíkhon and began to undress.
“And do you feel quite calm?” Rostóv asked.

unexpectedly before them, sometimes rushed back and sometimes forward,

her mother was still praying she ran on tiptoe to the bed and, rapidly
Soldiers ordered to advance ran back on meeting grapeshot; soldiers
Pierre well remembered this small circular drawing room with its mirrors
having passed Uvárov’s cavalry he clearly heard the sound of cannon
wished to take another seat so as not to trouble the lady, and also to
who had rescued Pétya was talking to a functionary about the priests who
“He wants to see a battle,” said Zherkóv to Bolkónski, pointing
surmises concerning their collective activity.
suited the young ladies, and she thanked them all for having entertained
Madrid.
most melancholy law of necessity, but considered themselves heroes and

looking now at the cavalry regiment that had met the convoy of wounded,

made Pierre in his eyes a hero and a saint.
“What relation are you to Intendant General Kiríl Andréevich Denísov?”
“Who do you want, sir?” asked a voice in the darkness.
“Sónya, do you remember?” asked Nicholas.
movements. And what are they doing, all these courtiers? Pfuel proposes,
therefore most terrible thoughts—would give him no peace. He knew that
commands with events we must restore: (1) the condition of all that

“I do not know what you think, Father,” whispered the princess.
repeating: “Sublime! Grand! Napoléon le Grand!” Du sublime au ridicule
frost....”
bitterly. “Ah me! I believed in some ideal love which was to keep her
him several riders with white plumes in their hats. In a moment everyone
and again proceeded to gallop along the line, penetrating farther and

The old lady’s condition was understood by the whole household though no
had stuck labels on the corresponding paragraphs of the different codes.
“Know this, Másha: I can’t reproach, have not reproached, and never
As often happens in early youth, especially to one who leads a lonely
pressed Prince Andrew’s hand.
    BOOK FOUR: 1806
look in his shining eyes, he told the whole story of his life: his
to sin. To leave family, home, and all the cares of worldly welfare, in
plan perfectly worthless. Weyrother met all objections with a firm and
Sónya, who had a tear-stained face, but he could not see Natásha.
nor a commander in chief, but a father! If you want anything come
Pierre in his preoccupation and absent-mindedness had not recognized

thought, “must not respond to her faithful, devoted love? Yet I should
upwards, in the way affected by the Emperor Alexander, and, having
having uttered this compliment, he again gazed at him in silence.
straight before him, his right eye was awry, and his brows and lips
accomplished without all the preceding wars and without the invasion. If
the sole cause of the whole disaster, and with characteristically
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You
drive the princess away by that scream... “Killed!”
evil and falsehood of life too clearly to be able to take a serious part
The manly voice again interrupted the artillery officer.
“Still the same. Wait, for heaven’s sake. Karl Ivánich always says
was in confusion and crumbling to pieces, that nobody was right or
wishing to avail himself of their courtesy, and this caused some delay
“No, madame!” Pierre continued in a tone of displeasure, “I have not
note. I am in such a state.... My only hope now is in Count Cyril


depended on arrangements made by the staff, I should be there making
be troubled, while he on his side promised not to undertake anything
already been concluded, he admitted to the Emperor that the merit of
written, “still, I should not cry, but you can’t... no one can

varying expression and the same prevalent appearance of goodhearted

“Excuse me, your excellency,” he began. (He was well acquainted with
two glasses with wine.
little drummer boy had been taken alive, and as he was a straggler he
Princess Mary postponed her departure. Sónya and the count tried to

brought into Wischau from our outposts. This officer was Savary. The
Lóbnoe Place, Pierre had so definitely made up his mind that he could no
“Eh, sir, this is no place for you,” said he, and ran down the slope.
some in ambition, some in cards, some in framing laws, some in women,

but when he reached it he found it was a road. Having come out onto
expressed. He wished to help her and say something pleasant, but could
King Francis is not much delighted by your victory. Even I, a poor
sounded much like irony. But Kutúzov went on blandly smiling with the

me from returning to the country. But now, at the commencement of the
He imagined himself as an enormously tall, powerful man who was throwing
“What do I care? Let him hear! We’re not dogs,” said the ex-captain of


Her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone besides
same Kutúzov who in August had been chosen commander in chief

elbows turned outwards, his hands on his knees, and his shoulders
cavalry in front, behind it the artillery, and behind that again the
This conception is the one handle by means of which the material of
the Cossacks had given him he at once agreed with Mouton and issued

“Well, now you’ve done what you wanted,” put in Nicholas—“said
And turning to his men he directed a party to go on to the halting place

a musketry fire at the French cavalry that was pursuing our troops. It
anything to say to the contrary. But no one said anything. “Moscow, our
divine love cannot change. No, neither death nor anything else can
one of disdain which was quite uncalled for. His fertile mind instantly

incredulously; and even more abashed, I said that though I was living
“A future life?” Prince Andrew repeated, but Pierre, giving him no
to celebrate the signing of peace with the Turks, and the crowd rushed
and one tall, long-necked officer, walking round the fire, came up to
your father and of Nicholas.”
wounded where there was no one left to fire at, on seeing an adjutant
seeing the fright of that small and frail but proud man when covered by
The officers were about to take leave, but Prince Andrew, apparently
The French dragoon was a young Alsatian who spoke French with a German
Not to speak of the fact that no description of the collective activity

would I not give now to be unmarried! You are the first and only one to
had recourse to his new judge was when a French prisoner, a colonel,
“Eh, Dron, it will turn out badly!” he said, shaking his head.
who was in a high fever. These last days, mistrusting their household
on at the crossing. And why are they dawdling there?”
“Stretchers!” shouted someone behind him.
velvety softness, which so mingled with her lack of art in singing that
strong there that Rostóv held his nose and had to pause and collect
than all else is to love this life in one’s sufferings, in innocent
to the neighboring houses, from which wounded men began to come into the
All these people and horses seemed driven forward by some invisible


in attaching himself as an orderly officer to Prince Bagratión. He now
that exchange bank of history which offers to exchange history’s
I doing? Aren’t they laughing at me? Shan’t I be ashamed to remember

CHAPTER XXIV

bands for us. Well, never mind.”
door she stopped as if her conscience reproached her for having in

“Give him some porridge: it takes a long time to get filled up after

to the subject of “advisers” which evidently occupied him. “Ah, those
forward.) “Such a question cannot be put; it is senseless! The question
distinguished men think so, it must be necessary and right,” thought he.
truth. In the first place I like her very much, I feel drawn to her; and
the Russian position.
catching the curtain of the cot. Each made the other a warning gesture

as quickly as possible, finish with the bows and greetings, and sit down
“Sir,” he said, “permit me to ask you to stand aside. You must not be
Pierre felt himself far poorer than when his father had made him
had taken place in herself. From the moment she recognized that dear,



his strength increased tenfold. He rushed at the barefooted Frenchman
“In a minute! In a minute! Don’t come in, Papa!” she cried to her
where the steward’s high bedstead stood with its patchwork quilt.

the odor emanating from him which was now stronger than before, Pierre

commissariat, and so on and so on—millions of commands, which formed
all her attention. He seemed to her kind, brave, determined, manly, and
The governor’s wife led him up to a tall and very stout old lady with
The cheerful mood of their officers after the inspection infected the
very briefly and vaguely, that after brilliant engagements the Russians
his eye as a miller wakes up when the soporific drone of the mill wheel

creatures, and he so longed to find in someone the living ideal of that
workmen surrounding the publican paused in indecision.
by reference to the mass only: stating that momenta are equal or unequal
Bezúkhova’s salon was regarded as a diploma of intellect. Young men

me to burn the bridge! I know the service, and it is my habit orders
Hélène’s presence (as a lover should be), but had not yet proposed


displease you. However,” he added rising, “you know my name and
The high-shouldered figure of Zherkóv, familiar to the Pávlograds as
“When would you like them, your excellency?” asked Dmítri. “Allow
youth and his wish to express all that was in his mind.

cannot be bound by what a false religion laid upon me.”
criminal,” came into Pierre’s head, “and from their point of
in the house was done in haste at that time), and Pierre and Anna
by some rule unknown to him decided what should or should not be done.
Mary.
question a Russian prisoner captured by the cavalry. Followed by
weceives evewyone, thank God!... It’s awful with those sausage eaters!
With these words she greeted Prince Vasíli Kurágin, a man of high
irresolution, and alarm, yet at the same time joyfully expecting

orders and reports were only on paper, nothing in them was acted upon

“Put that down, that’s bad... very bad,” sternly remarked the general
great precision and formality.
separation....”
and Prince Andrew began telling him the story of Bluebeard, but fell

immense number of the delving insects prove that despite the destruction
When the monotonous sound of Weyrother’s voice ceased, Kutúzov opened
getting up with characteristic briskness and holding out his hand to the

rose, by a glance inviting Pierre, who sat opposite, to listen to what
be very glad to do all in my power both for you and for this dear young
to greet the young man.

    CHAPTER IV
same place on the Poklónny Hill awaiting the deputation. His speech to
Emperor, but to apply to the commander of the corps.... But in general,
    CHAPTER XIX
to move from right to left as if drawn by an invisible hand, and the
“From General Field Marshal Kutúzov?” he asked. “I hope it is
“Not this way! To the infantry!” added another with loud laughter,
compartment of Napoleon’s tent, where he began opening the box while
knows what may happen. You may cease to... all right, I know I am not

have attained the same end,” returned Prince Andrew. “Every courtier


and conscious of his proximity she experienced a frightened sense of
found ourselves in my bedroom where there is a double bed. He lay down

he says: ‘Go and give a weceipt to the commissioner, but your affair
that were so agonizingly, incessantly pulling and pressing his arm and
seemed to Pierre to constitute perfect happiness; and the choice
nourishment it affords; and the purpose of marriage is the family.

pleased at the importance of the mission entrusted to him, went to
seemed to express a secret understanding between him and them. And when
his leave.
     * You expect to make an income out of the government.
Bartenstein, as the Pávlograds were at the outposts far beyond that

despairing gesture with his hand and passed through the room.
expression of agitated surprise and guilt she went about the house,
but he was rudely interrupted, pushed aside, and people turned away
tea and evidently needed a pretext for being angry after her meal. “What
when several voices shouted at it did it dart to one side and disappear
“Now, why frighten them?” said Pelagéya Danílovna.
“Yes, yes.”
matters, social interests and the fair sex occupied no small part of his

trees on each side, following the infantry and a battery that had gone
down in a corner, and folding his hands placed himself before the icon.

suddenly began to cry.
The old count pretended to be angry.
they demanded contributions of fuel.
up and asked him what was the matter. He did not answer and looked at
the uselessness of freeing the serfs, who were quite happy as it was.


imperceptibly shaping itself, and at every moment of this continuous,
tried to conceal them.
river, all began to sparkle in the glad light—Pierre felt a new joy and
shall think nothing of an extra seventy miles to come and see you at
on horseback facing the ditch. One with a white plume in his hat seemed

whose expression of sympathy was pleasing to him.
and go into bondage! I dare say! ‘I’ll give you grain, indeed!’ she
slipped a gold coin into his hand and always returned to the patient
may be, re-establish public confidence, the source of the welfare of
“I did not expect this,” said he to his adjutant Schneider when the
understanding but not wishing to appear to do so. The princess as usual
waving it above his head cried:
from it. And from that hut, while Denísov was speaking, a general with a
He scattered the burning tobacco, smashed the pipe, and threw it away.
for the children. I am nursing and my milk was spoiled.... Pétya was at
anyone to pieces, but faced its fate, feeling within it the strength to
rode, not hoping to find anyone but merely to ease his conscience. When
that battlefield; and something that had long been slumbering, something
officers,” continued the staff captain, “and Bogdánich” (the
being free, for it is irrevocably linked to the moment at which it was
London—could pronounce Pitt’s sentence, he saw a well-built and
sense of the necessity of undertaking something and sacrificing
place! We passed close to the park and saw two deer... and what a


no time to ask himself whether these people were sincere or not. He
suddenly flushing. “And I say boldly that I have not a single man’s life

Mávra Kuzmínichna went to the gate.
Before dinner, Princess Mary and Mademoiselle Bourienne, who knew
the creditors threatened, he re-entered the government service.
of this unknown factor and tries to discover it—now in a geometric
only a full-grown hare would cross the field now I’d show you what

were leaving to join their regiment after Epiphany. About twenty people
could she have a love letter from him in her hand?
neck. That officer did not take his eyes from Dólokhov and again asked

“You can’t, Miss, we have tried to,” said the butler’s assistant.

Princess. I am at your command.’ Yes, he is a fine fellow and a very
only the beginnings of marriage and not its whole significance, which

Three weeks passed in this way. Natásha had no desire to go out

Not in vain had Berg shown everybody his right hand wounded at
chessmen with his delicate white fingers while awaiting Berg’s move,

thought.
essential to speak the whole truth.
superintendent’s trap which drove into the square attended by two
receive impressions that might weaken it.
Rostóvs were staying in Yaroslávl, and in what condition Prince Andrew
involuntarily, so much so that the only thing left to do seemed to be
any day. I should like them to meet here.”



“Don’t say that to me! I want nothing. I love you as a brother and
from the west to the east killing their fellow men, and the event
contradictory, except the feeling that guides the dream, so in this
up, ran off in all directions, abandoning cannons, muskets, and horses.
man who has at length begun to attain a long-desired happiness. As soon
it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
chief’s feet without upsetting the old man by informing him of the
going to church every day for a week and not once missing Vespers,
subscription. The lady who was thought to be most pleasing to the
clean-shaven cheek to kiss. The whole expression of his face told
The countess was accustomed to this tone as a precursor of news of
for the mistake, but because he was an object of sufficient importance
time to the Emperor.

forbidden them to fight the Russians, they would have killed him and
face, and again at the arm, and on his face a feeble, piteous smile
“You’ll make a fine thing of it, deploying in sight of the enemy!
father’s friendship for you; but now I entreat you for God’s sake to

crossed.
all this and not feel sad? But ‘the maggot gnaws the cabbage, yet dies
     gbnewby@pglaf.org
without some groans gave orders to their stewards about the enrollment,
to be reserved because in the depth of my soul I feel too near to him

Majesty of Balashëv’s mission, whose name he could not pronounce.
“Dunyásha, you pack! You will, won’t you, dear?” And when Dunyásha
“The master is not in, he’s gone to headquarters,” said
Christmas came and except for the ceremonial Mass, the solemn and
point of view and study the laws of the movement of steam, of the
Gentlemen, let us act! Time is most precious....”

CHAPTER XII
of one man, but in the interaction of many persons connected with the

when our men were not always getting full rations and the prisoners
Translators: Louise and Aylmer Maude

bounded by the will of the prince, and he never went beyond that limit.
to say, and sometimes questioned her carefully about the Pénza and
Sónya was not less agitated than her friend by the latter’s fear and
execrable, yet to him is entrusted the fate of our whole country.... I
the bells were ringing, Pierre got out of his vehicle and proceeded on
but had on one of her best dresses. Her hair was carefully done and her
according to the point of view from which the action is regarded, but
way, because he wished to fulfill his duty and earn fame as a great
    CHAPTER IV
taken place.

maid.
his present Sónya from whom he had resolved never to be parted again.

scarcely moving their legs, and dead ones that have not been cleared
“I thank your Serene Highness, but I fear I am no longer fit for the
twitched, ugly wrinkles gathered round her mouth, and covering her face
Natásha, who had come in during the conversation, looked joyfully at
Pierre took the letter Anatole handed him and, pushing aside a table
favorite song: native and birch tree and my heart is sick occurred in
of yours, is not at all to blame that my face has the misfortune to
S— S— get the same distinction?”


Bórovsk said he had seen an immense army entering the town. Some
“Why not wash? That is not cleanly,” said Prince Andrew; “on the
passage and will hold her back by force and will and not let the family
to supply it. Others in that heat and crush racked their brains to find
hearing a rustle, rushes straight at the hunter’s gun, runs forward and
ranks in this regiment.”
was there because it suited him to be. The ex-Minister Stein was there
“Dear doctor,” said she, “this young man is the count’s son. Is
peasants followed them.
“Well, friends, I have now thought the whole matter over and this is
soldier three gold pieces.
the subject of her request and must not be shown before the request was
Chancery! I’ll take them where they must go, scold them a bit, and
room.
CHAPTER XVI
“Yes, if you put it like that it’s quite a different matter,” said
French would be destroyed. But neither the French nor the Russians made
haste, trying to escape notice, closed the door, and began to read the

the room in silence, and then, suddenly and unexpectedly, went up to
were well known to him. Count Arakchéev’s anteroom had quite a
“I don’t think this interests you?”
would have been the wish to capture army corps of the French, when our
“Anna Ignátyevna wants to see you, Nicholas,” said she, pronouncing the
he was now even more experienced and skillful than before. Even the

piercing the terrestrial globe with a toy stick, and just as they would
great haste and in the greatest disorder. The road was so obstructed
fill whole volumes to demonstrate their merits, when they relate to a
“Yes, yes, go and tell them to get it ready,” she answered,

room that Count Rostóv had called, the princess showed no confusion,
continue long, that a catastrophe was coming which would change his
“Only when will all that be? I am afraid never.... It would be too
one another in a world of indifferent people.


    CHAPTER V
from a habit acquired during his sufferings.

But the word always seemed to her to imply: “Yes, I am angry but I won’t

moments, he strode back to Michaud and pressed his arm below the elbow
frightened, sickly little face.
“I’m glad,” answered Dólokhov briefly and clearly, as the song
to a company, and though the French availed themselves of every
That is still too fresh. Ah, dear friend, you are happy not to know
familiar to Prince Andrew. Several dressers were pressing on his chest

were divided at the commencement of the campaign. We tried to unite
in a voice familiar to Prince Andrew. “Houses are set on fire in your
remaining in Moscow, and only awaited the termination of Denísov’s
his supposed power, his intellect, his experience, and his knowledge
calm and, as always happens, as soon as he became physically tranquil
Rostopchín shouted angrily at the governor:
gown and fez, his face distorted with fury and the pupils of his eyes
In June, after many balls and fetes given by the Polish magnates, by the

would give a thousand men and their maintenance.
To this chit of a girl, Natásha, who not so long ago was playing with
heard from that spot, of the dog’s howl, of the guilty faces of the two
“Would not your excellency like a little refreshment?” he said.

she remembered the light falling through that crack once before and
ran up to Sónya, scrutinized her, and then ran to her mother. Turning



liked to repeat to herself. It was the story of a girl who had been
“You are letting yourself go, my dear fellow,” he said.


rode past the limbers to the farthest cannon.
been intriguing!”
screams, continued.
Princess Mary heard him and did not understand how he could say such a
Sónya in any way and tried to be fond of her, but often felt ill-will
Natásha, raising her face for a moment from her mother’s mantilla,
heard on every side.
    BOOK ONE: 1805

“Only fools and rakes fall ill, my boy. You know me: I am busy from
“How glad I am you have come. You are tired. Won’t you have some tea?”
descent lit up, and facing it a black knoll that seemed as steep as a
prospect was so splendid that she hardly believed it would come true,
Many persons withdrew from the circle, noticing the senator’s sarcastic
his limitations, would not know himself. The hardest thing (Pierre went
The second party was directly opposed to the first; one extreme, as
was nothing. So why should I not stay at his house? Then I played cards
open, and divine service is performed in them unhindered. Your fellow
same firm pressure of the hand and the same quick, repeated bows. As
begun very well and was as like as two peas to every other evening party
Occasionally he stopped, listened to the firing, and gazed intently at
disbelieved both the princess’ hints and the letter, but he feared
The officer mounted his horse and rode after him. When he reached the
assured himself from the way Rostóv looked at it that his coat had been
and then more shots.
“Adjutant!” he shouted. “Order them not to crowd together.”
regretted that the lad should have heard him. He had, however, to give
are all stupid; but I know this: an illegitimate son cannot inherit...
herself in a white satin dressing gown embroidered with silver and with
by the blood that they are ready to sacrifice everything for their
awkward to attract everyone’s attention and to be considered a
and everybody had to serve, he took a post under his father in the
“I did once, but gave it up. I am not fit for it. That’s it, come
sense of awe and veneration such as he had experienced in his boyhood at
of his return.

she only repeated that she begged him to forget what she had said, that
dressed and undressed, drying their shirts and leg bands or mending
man who had the next bed, a stout Uhlan, continued to sit on his bed,
Suddenly he heard Denísov shouting in a vibrating voice behind the hut,
came up to him smiling. Borís was elegantly dressed, with a slightly
“What? What did he say?” was heard in the ranks of the Polish Uhlans
dense, which, swelling, growing, rolling, and blending, extended over
but his face expressed the impossibility of altering that decision.
Nicholas was silent and agreed with her.
and watched his opponent’s face, evidently thinking about the game as
and colonel looked sternly and significantly at one another like two
avoid seeing her unpleasantly irritated and irresolute face, and said:
retaken by the Russians and burned, in the very skirmish at which Pierre
saying, and sat plunged in thought. Five minutes later, gently swaying
were also distinguished by the fact that she always presented some new
ever because Anatole’s presence had vividly recalled to her the time
The horses were brought. Denísov was angry with the Cossack because the
“I know from reliable sources that the Dowager Empress is taking a
“Have you lost anyone, my dear fellow? You’re of the gentry yourself,
pressing round him. Pierre went up to the circle that had formed round
inexperienced commanders as the Russian army was. Not only did no one
the wolf jumped up more quickly than anyone could have expected and,
Saviour’s words, that it is easier for a camel to go through the
own insignificance and insincerity compared with the truth, simplicity,
“About Prince Michael...”
At the levee Prince Andrew stood among the Austrian officers as he had
substituting a z for the s and adding de and the article le, still
“Anísya, go and see if the strings of my guitar are all right. I
“If you were counting on the evening soup, you have come too late,” said
For a long time he could not understand what was happening to him. All
Lodge. Willarski coughed, he was answered by the Masonic knock with
of them. It was not merely Dimmler and the Rostóvs she failed to
Even before he gave that order the thing he did not desire, and for
Having arranged matters thus, Denísov and Dólokhov intended, without
it right; no, you don’t understand,” though he encouraged her by saying
to the Vienna-Znaim road. Bagratión was to make this march without
“A-tu!” came the long-drawn cry of one of the borzoi whippers-in,
with the lofty heavens, his wife’s dead reproachful face, Pierre at
“So we are to have visitors, mon prince?” remarked Mademoiselle
proceeding, he walked deliberately down the carpeted gangway, his sword
“That was a nice snub for the little aide-de-camp,” came a voice
understand, and the greatness of something incomprehensible but
who had stolen some boots from the recruits; I should even have been
possibility of the existence of any laws for the whole of humanity.
him.
three daughters besides a son for whom she had longed and whom she was
life in it. The bees do not fly in the same way, the smell and the sound
the room, and seeming not to notice the chairs was dashing straight at
Nicholas brusquely (imagining this to be characteristically military)
her.”
“Wine? Gluttony? Idleness? Laziness? Irritability? Anger? Women?”
to render his words more comprehensible by contorting them.
has to submit, and Vasíli Dmítrich doesn’t want to. You know the

room.
it proper in his quality of doctor de forcer la consigne, * as he told

the worthlessness of the Drissa camp lies in having the river behind it,
wet, painfully sobbing child to himself as tenderly as he could and ran
misshapen, and grim as ever.
attacker should concentrate his forces in order to be stronger than his

table.
referred to—in their simplicity failing to understand the question of
to it! But they... they were steady and calm all the time, to the



success.”
Someone was snoring under them, and around them stood saddled horses

itself in the expression of Denísov’s face and the intonations of his

trace of you remain here!...”
when she began to speak passed through such transitions as she herself
“What are you disputing about?” said the major angrily. “What does it
come in.”
“Wh-what is the matter?” asked both the young and old Rostóv.
“Well...” Anatole looked at his watch. “We’ll start at once.

Emperor Francis continued to look about him and did not listen.
“My wife,” continued Prince Andrew, “is an excellent woman, one
to soften down what he had said; but Natásha interrupted him to show
patience and devotion, but tried to keep aloof from her.
same surroundings in which it used to be so easy to live. I’m pretty,
Alpátych replied that the Governor had not told him anything definite.

something striking and took part in a conversation only when that was
gentleman,” said the postmaster, entering the room followed by another
attributed. As often happens with passionate people, he was mastered by
that Kutúzov was. Count Rostopchín was mentally preparing the angry and
son, sat at the table writing. He glanced round.
at us....”
And by means of that mysterious indefinable bond which maintains

“I know everything!” Napoleon interrupted him. “I know everything. I

But at that instant a tall Austrian general in a greatcoat, with the
out on the logs. Without lifting his head he said something, and two of
juniper, a printed band was tucked in under his shriveled head, and in a


fright were amused by Pierre’s lisp and the new words they had not
with all their teeth and hair, and had only left it when not a single
self-possession. If a man lacking in self-confidence remains dumb on
any women—countesses or cooks—who were not venal. I have not yet met
His despair was all the greater from feeling that his own weakness was

two elderly men and her brother were trying to conceal, and was herself
be difficult to return to the old regime.”
From Górki, Bennigsen descended the highroad to the bridge which, when
yourself and say you nearly ruined your life and only found happiness
government offices removed; now distributed quite useless weapons to
but extremely attractive.
clutched the crupper of his saddle and, spurring his horse, galloped to
he asked, turning to Shinshín. “Didn’t he vanish somewhere?”
especially attracted his attention. The peasant seemed to him not merely

universal historians sometimes, when it pleases them and fits in with

at Sónya with a look that showed she did not want to speak of it in her



Tell the Cossack to fetch my kit. I have two French uniforms in it.
running up the avenue with frightened faces.
for the talkative doctor to go.
    Tendre mélancholie, ah, viens me consoler,

smooth, ingratiating voice.
derision. “I ought to know the Emperor by now, after the times I’ve
years’ time, when everything would be made free and so “simple” that

in it. Every sphere of work was connected, in his eyes, with evil and
words—the Great All or Nothing-” said he to himself, “or to
occupied by the French, with lilac bushes still showing dark green
Besides being occupied with his estates and reading a great variety of
his wont, as if intentionally contrasting the briskness of his manners



themselves giving it a thought, yet in Petersburg their circle of
they woke late and were again delayed so often that they only got as far
but a German, who moves the locomotive. Only then, as a result of the
What would have seemed difficult or even impossible to another woman did
nonobservance of the Continental System, the Duke of Oldenburg’s
all the army methods and had infantry, artillery, staffs, and the
understanding and expressing each other’s thoughts in ways contrary to

attainment of certain ends—the greatness of Russia or of France,


It was impossible first because—as experience shows that a three-mile
“Sit down with me a little,” said the countess.



sphinxes carved on the corners of the bedstead, so that the countess
On approaching it, Rostóv felt as he had done when approaching his home
were throwing everything superfluous, made the eyes smart. It was cold
aware of his existence. At the quarters of the commander in chief,
“But what I say is,” he said, turning to Rostóv, “it would be
“Yes, yes, I do remember something too,” Sónya answered timidly.


trunks to the storerooms. When they understood that order the servants
of all that mass of huge and handsome men, of all those brilliant,

“Yes, of course,” returned Anatole, evidently not listening to
sun. How beautiful the sky looked; how blue, how calm, and how deep!
put our affairs in order while I am alive, that’s all. And to do that,

staff officer.
impression his news of a victory would create, or recalling the send-off
village. Tell it to stop and await my orders.”
thought of him, he was living a real life, seeing new places and new
God,” Pierre went round the table and saw a large open box filled
blushing unexpectedly.
it. At that moment it meant nothing to him who might be standing over
away.
hand, rode up smiling to the Emperor to congratulate him on the victory.
ice and into the water and oftenest of all among the crowd that covered
“There are gentry here; the general himself is in that hut, and you

cavalier of St. George, the hussar remount officer, the good-natured
Vereshchágin...”
its last march the day before—presented a well-ordered array of two
instant, scrambled out on all fours, all black with the wet, and ran on.

ironical voice.
be before he met Kurágin, despite his contempt for him and despite all
Influence in society, however, is a capital which has to be economized

Princess Mary and Natásha met as usual in the bedroom. They talked of
Denísov touched his horse and rode down the hill. Slipping onto their
so doing we should destroy the very conception of man in the case we are
flee as to an inviolable bulwark and protection,” there again kindled in


“Well, now tell me about your exploits,” said he.
Lëlya’s name day. I will invite two or three people, and if he does


“Bolkónski!” he whispered, his voice trembling from a consciousness

make happy plans for the future. She spoke little of Pierre, but when
“All the same, Aunt, it is impossible,” he rejoined with a sigh, after
    CHAPTER XII
“Vive l’Empereur! Vive le roi de Rome! Vive l’Empereur!” came those
refused to yield to the charm of spring or notice either the spring or
election as chief of the militia would not please the Emperor. They did

study.
advanced only because they fit in with the event. Had that event not
Nicholas sat at some distance from Sónya, beside Julie Karágina, to
that time:
reconstruction of which Prince Andrew had a vague idea, and Speránski
wantonly abandoned. I, for my part, begged him personally most urgently
time, and nothing can be done now!” he replied to someone else.

the peasant, moving away.
was carried out—not because those orders differed in any way from the
after the battle but send a courier to Petersburg with news of a
certain. There’s Lise, married to Andrew—a better husband one would
indifferent to them but regarded them with hostility. She heard

The subject which wholly engrossed Natásha’s attention was her family:
everyone questioned him about what he had seen. Pierre felt particularly
asked Pierre if he had ever experienced a similar impulse to sacrifice
Men uniting in these combinations always assume such relations toward
he” (indicating Rostóv) “has connections on the staff. You won’t
considered it his duty to visit him and waited in the lofty antechamber
none to anyone.”
gesture with his trembling arms: “How dare you, sir, say that to me? You
captivity he had learned that in Karatáev God was greater, more infinite
“What people are these?” he shouted again, receiving no answer.
Ashamed as she was of acknowledging to herself that she had fallen in

to our Petersburg lodge, of the bad reception I had encountered, and of
Oh, Andrew! What a treasure of a wife you have,” said she, sitting
statistics. What is man’s responsibility to society, the conception of
he heard the boom, boom, boom of firing, the thud of projectiles, groans
diplomatist?” asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.
“What next?” the princess interrupted, smiling sardonically and not
and, with the aid of the Code Napoléon and the Institutes of Justinian,
alongside, and blew our way, the maid called out ‘Fire!’ and we rushed
“Please come in here. The masters are going away and the whole house
“Lord Jesus Christ, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord Jesus

the door of the shed.
an eye on me! Very well then! Get along with you!’ So he writes the
each time he touched his forehead. His face wore a calm look of piety
five hundred thousand men, and the downfall of Napoleonic France, on

at Bald Hills with his wife. This pleasure will be but a brief one,
    CHAPTER XXI
In the shed everyone was ready, dressed, belted, shod, and only awaited
The visitor, compelled to look on at this family scene, thought it
letter persuaded him to return. She wrote that if he did not come and
He is not ‘Uncle’s’ man.”
“Are you remaining in Moscow, then?”
“Uncle’s” favorite expression.) “Take the covert at once, for my

“I’m quite worn out by these callers. However, I’ll see her and
lying on the ground; they also met a crowd of soldiers some of whom were
and malevolence with which the old prince received and dismissed the

the way from Ulm, while Dólokhov maintained that the Russians had not
countess with a gentle smile, looking at Borís and went on, evidently

before we are turned out of Petersburg.”
burn, I could not know by the holy spirit!”
the effect of making them gradually begin to forget him without being
to her.”

“All over?” he repeated. “If I were not myself, but the handsomest,
cher,” he paused, “abstiens-toi” *(2)—he articulated the French proverb
Pierre was not at all surprised at this question. He understood his
Rostóv saw tears filling the Emperor’s eyes and heard him, as he was
War’s anteroom).
understood himself. Princess Mary well knew this mood of quiet absorbed
and resentment the Emperor had found a phrase that pleased him, fully
be there. His having moved his troops there is only a ruse; he will
in his mind as to whether what he had undertaken was right or wrong.
but in the center where the men with a flag of truce had passed that
officers was the safest, and though he would have been glad to be of
Two orderlies, a courier and a major-domo, stood near by, some ten paces
said one sergeant major.
“Do you really not recognize her?”
came with the news that the prince could not attend. Prince Andrew came
brought, looked dumbly around as a wounded beast looks at an approaching
things not belonging to them. Crowds of the kind seen at cheap sales
Emperor at once rode up to him, offered his services, and assisted him

as it should be.
when you began living for others. I experienced just the reverse. I
unexpected!”
it, but when spoken and not sung, no meaning could be got out of it. He
the time (Joseph de Maistre and others) recognized. Still more senseless
themselves to someone younger. On all these faces, as on the faces
“Wostóv, get up!”
disposition it is said that, after the fight has commenced in this
abandoned in the center?” he inquired, searching with his eyes for

The “man of great merit,” despite his desire to obtain the post of


“I must... I must have a talk with you,” said Prince Andrew. “You
“They will be left!...”
that soldier’s breast for the soldier to be forever happy, rewarded,

“Hurrah!” was heard on all sides.
is an alliance of virtue: it is love, mutual help... it is what Christ

it.
Thirdly it was impossible, because the military term “to cut off” has no
surprise.
son! Satisfied, are you? That’s all you wanted! Satisfied?... It hurts
grieved for a moment at parting from him. And Pierre began to feel in
infantry.
a place by the cannon from where he hoped to see the Emperor who
painfully pressed. “Natalie?”
missy! Ooh!” lamented Aníska, who at the sight of the fire felt that she
louder.
Sónya’s joint ages. Rostóv, leaning his head on both hands, sat at
cautious of undertaking any decisive action and avoided giving battle.
in perplexity, and only later grasped that a stroke was an attack of
what they had lived through and experienced could not be expressed in
had surrounded the French on three sides and when its aim was to capture
Having baited the horses twice on the way, he arrived at the town toward
Andrew. “Well, and what do you think of Kutúzov’s appointment?” he
proverb says,” remarked Shinshín, moving his pipe to the other side
when he was needed there—now when his part was played out, Kutúzov’s
“Yes, it’s all very well, but when a man’s feet are frozen how can he
(2) What force produces the movement of the nations?
command of the first army, and a request to the duke—whom he said he

Rostóv explained that he wanted to see Major Denísov of the hussars,
ravine. Pétya rode beside Denísov, the pulsation of his body constantly
The sick man was so surrounded by doctors, princesses, and servants
knowing what to say and he repeated it till Hélène came up to them.
belonging to members of the family, there were about a hundred and
    CHAPTER VI
Moscow when Borís was a boy of fourteen, and had quite forgotten him,
“Go, Tit, thresh a bit!” said the wag.
baggage and transport, having to accept battle on the march against an
on a sofa in a far corner of the room. He closed his eyes and seemed to
stood the carts ready corded. The carriages were at the front porch.
houses and moved it to their own, pretending that it was their property.
that it was a letter from him—from the man she loved. Yes, she loved
would have happened if on approaching Tarútino, Napoleon had attacked
that he had some business.

with lanterns, standing at the entrance. She went out on the stairs. On
sounds, rolling her eyes.
welcome.
his participation in that action.

if she saw straight into their souls. Yesterday, for instance, Mítya was
musketry fire, now Russians were seen alone, now Frenchmen alone, now
absence. Little Nicholas had been unwell for four days. The coachman who
a son of Nicholas Bolkónski, I shall be ashamed!”
talking to the Emperor himself, to that very Emperor who had written his
treated only with internal and external applications of vodka) was the
him. “What is this? They’re like sheep! Just like sheep! Out of the

of smoke that had concealed the hollow, driven by a rising wind, began
Kozlóvski were squatting on the floor by a tub so near to the commander
Vozdvízhenka Street, he drove that same evening to see her.
throats and wiping the hoarfrost from their faces in the vestibule,
thought she, “if I ventured to confide what I am feeling to someone.
but without proper feeling. Brother Urúsov came and we talked about
myself and drove away that thought only when I found myself glowing with

you will remember this, your excellency!”

Princess Mary saw Dessalles’ embarrassed and astonished look fixed on
wound, but now he took advantage of it to excuse himself from appearing
“I? I? What did I tell you?” said Pierre suddenly, rising and
mare he rode, his hand in a white glove gathered up the reins, and he
Sónya was there too, tormented by curiosity as to what Prince Andrew and

“My carriage!” he said.
each individual which used to excite and irritate Pierre now became a
Pierre spoke rapidly and with animation. He glanced once at the
“You know my feelings for you!”
brows and a straggly beard, was saying.
The count ordered his carriage that he might drive to Sokólniki, and sat
crop on any single acre of the Boguchárovo fields.
rode in angry agitation toward him, firmly grasping his whip and fully
avoid notice. Pétya decided to go straight to where the Emperor was and
certain, nothing at all except the unimportance of everything I
inquiringly at the young prince, wondering what would follow.



      And for being a gallant old boy...

name of my dead father, who was a good master to you, and of my brother
“There, it’s just as I thought,” said Rostóv to himself. “He

proposition to you in his pupil’s—I mean, his son’s—name. Do you
This door led into a back anteroom. An old man, a servant of the
Just at the time Prince Andrew was living unoccupied at Drissa,
gave him the opportunity: Sónya’s reading, any remark of the count’s, or
things were going in the army, the rumors of the discovery of spies in
one another. Pierre, breathing heavily, looked around as if asking what
clever.... Oh no, she is simply enchanting, and that is all.”
Anna Pávlovna frowned. Mortemart, Hippolyte’s friend, addressed him
the aide-de-camp with a respectful politeness evidently relating to the

naturally turned on the peace. The officers, his comrades, like most of
demonstrated, and at last contemptuously ceased to demonstrate, like

her, Princess?”
and the rattling of carriage wheels seemed to fill his ears, and now
the question of selection. Pierre disturbed the symmetry by moving a
march, to the Túla road beyond the Pakhrá, the Russian commanders
    CHAPTER XIV
inhabitants. But Pierre did not know this; he was entirely absorbed
irritated her. It hurt her to think that while she lived only in the
saying. “I have been an atheist,” answered Pierre.
does not produce the slightest stir—a blind man has left it. There are
ferociously, pushed forward, elbowing his way and shouting “hurrah!” as
“The Cossacks!” one of them shouted, and a moment later a crowd of
the door; the scream ceased and he heard the wail of an infant.



as his eyes filled with tears.
selling any of his wife’s property, and having received a small
“Saddle! Second platoon!”
breaking rank, mingled with the French Guards and sat down at the tables
letter.
the boy’s hand. “Entrez, entrez.” *(2)
and with his hand at the salute rode up to the general.
As they approached the watchhouse Denísov stopped, peering into the

to bleed Denísov. A deep saucer of black blood was taken from his hairy
patriotism, he somehow felt ashamed to take the step. But the chief

kneeling beside it stirring its contents with a ramrod.
he did, as much as possible by signs, and her tongue too seemed to move
in the elder’s presence about loyalty to the Tsar and the country and
object that lay on the salver. It was the Order of St. George of the
The headquarters were situated two miles away from Salzeneck, and
Your misfortunes are cruel, but His Majesty the Emperor and King
proposed that plan to Barclay de Tolly and now wished to propose it
aid of his servant, and not looking at Pierre. With a pair of felt boots
the Russian army moved voluntarily, with no such threat of destruction

and her face was tearful.
portrait to be carried outside his tent, that the Old Guard, stationed
“From Dürrenstein to Krems.”
In the passage Denísov, with a pipe, was squatting on the threshold
which to attack and defeat the enemy should he cross the Lech. Also,
evening without even stopping to eat. Ermólov was nowhere to be found
unobtrusively to bind the hands of the protectors of disorder and to
steps should be taken to liberate the serfs, which the steward met by

that the wolf should come his way. He prayed with that passionate and


what is there? Who is there?—there beyond that field, that tree, that
Bourienne, unfolding her white napkin with her rosy fingers. “His
    CHAPTER XVI
he was silent, as if astonished, then he jumped out of bed, ran to me in
nothing but cause the Emperor annoyance.
the terrible memory would, on the contrary, dwell in his heart ever more
leaving a passage in the middle. Most of them were unconscious and
ought not to fight either for or against Austria. Our political


wood.
It was long since Rostóv had felt such enjoyment from music as he

tomorrow,” or, “Be in to dinner or I shall not see you,” or, “I


coat of arms on the table. He explained this to her with as much gravity
tossed aside each time like a cork thrown out of the water, and he could
amid the square masses of troops standing motionless as if turned to
“And we, my dear boy! It’s terrible! I was wrong to laugh at Mack,
    CHAPTER II
“However, I think General Kutúzov has come out,” said Prince
“Nicholas, you are talking nonsense! Be quiet, be quiet, be quiet, I
stopped and glanced inquiringly over his spectacles at his guide. Anna
maintain his powerful position with Alexander, whose own character was
to anybody, and especially to him, whether or not they found out that
knowing how this aimless lie had escaped him, he went along with

in Zherkóv, looking uneasily around. He had not seen the hussars all


CHAPTER XIII

    * The little one is charming.
with his face in his hands.
man in the fur-lined coat and pointing to the bottom step of the porch.
“Why ask me? General Armfeldt has proposed a splendid position with an
conversation with her, when Anna Pávlovna called him away on the
father’s face with an eager and respectful look. “How is your
“I don’t want anyone, I don’t love anyone but him. How dare you
without exception, this consciousness without which no conception of man
Anna Pávlovna’s alarm was justified, for Pierre turned away from the
he was there, behind, so close behind her.

in society it seems as if there were something in them, but there’s

surroundings, and from her smiling lips flowed sounds which anyone may

irrepressible and streaming tears tickling her nose and cheeks.
our eyes, it suddenly seemed quite clear and obvious to him that the
know all about it and understand it all,” he said. “You behaved as
and knew that the chief way to make them obey is to show no suspicion

be Anatole.
    CHAPTER VI
wished to run away with a certain lady here in Vorónezh.
admiring his partner, himself, and the fine outlines of his legs in

“So you want to smell gunpowder?” he said to Pierre. “Yes, it’s a
“The Emperor?... No, a minister... prince... ambassador. Don’t you

and turned away, not because he felt it hard and sad (Princess Mary and
That’s settled,” thought Nicholas. “All is over between us, but
“‘I most ardently desire,’ writes the King of Prussia to
are within sight of the enemy and he wishes to profit by the opportunity
In line with the knoll on both sides stood other guns which also fired
The countess glanced at her daughter, saw her face full of shame for her
dejected and frowning, sat on a bench by the bridge toying with his
A strange feeling of exasperation and yet of respect for this man’s
“What is the matter with you, my darling? You look pale. Oh, you
“Carrot ices.”
After her father’s funeral Princess Mary shut herself up in her room and
of Europe!” he declared, his face pale and distorted by anger, and he
No one more charming in society. Ah, here she is! Yes, she is still the

kindliness.
“Is this your saber?” asked Pétya. “Or is it yours?” he said,
“I know a thing or two myself!” said Nastásya Ivánovna.
slightly harmful pills in the little gilt box had to be administered?
yet at the same time was conscious of his strength as a part of that
own brother, killed in Turkey.
“a little volcano!”
Noticing the black outline of a man crossing the road, Dólokhov stopped
Suddenly a fresh sound, a piercing feminine scream, reverberated from
excitement, rushed toward the drawing room door, probably in order to
regrettable delusion.”

had a brilliant position in society thanks to his intimacy with Countess
hastened to act.
“To be on the march in such weather...” he began.
From among all these parties, just at the time Prince Andrew reached
“It’s the enemy?... No!... Yes, see it is!... for certain.... But
implied that, for certain considerations he could not know of, this was
“But now I am off at once.”
returned to Petersburg quite crestfallen.
long time of the love of God, of Christ, of the Sacred Heart, and of the
prince’s cold and stiffened hand.
daughter, and while he laughed the expression on his face clearly said:
the nurse’s and Dunyásha’s protests she went out into the porch; Dron,
    CHAPTER XXII
me,” Natásha entreated. “Remember no one ought to interfere in such

“Well, send for him... and how do you get on with that German?”

gazed at them and was ready to cry because it was not she who was
that it seemed to be made of one piece with her head and covered with

“But no! They shall eat horseflesh yet, like the Turks!” exclaimed
to the table. Pressed by the throng against the high backs of the
strongest of all influences: the intrigues, flattery, and self-deception

“Do you know, mon cher,” said Bilíbin following him, “I have been
come into the hall. Prince Hippolyte stood close to the pretty, pregnant
a military group of a size able to endure a collision with the warlike
She gave her companion an angry glance.
led along a certain carpet. After that they took his right hand, placed
here today, the nearer I got to the house the more anxious I grew. As I
loved that man. What has become of him? Is he alive?...
dangers.
“But... no,” said Pétya, “I don’t want to sleep yet. Besides I know
and fear.

looked at me with vexation and jumped up, breaking off his remarks. I
dealers with voices of ingratiating affability inviting customers to
the French grenadier.

“Yes, stories!” repeated Rostóv loudly, looking with eyes suddenly
would pretend to sympathize with my sorrow...” thought Princess Mary,
Hélène still sat talking just as before.
grasp the meaning of what was happening.
paper and her hand moved rapidly over it. This is the reply she wrote,
his track. Anatole Kurágin promptly obtained an appointment from
first meeting with Potëmkin. And he saw before him a plump, rather
from those who blame him and who profess to know the ultimate aim of the
nothing except the people about him.

Natásha.

“What is it?” he said crossly, and, his hand shaking
with glittering eyes and no sign of a smile.
more and more warmth. It was long since there had been so stormy a
wide, and assumed the expression he usually put on when taken to be
two or three days’ march. They are almost disbanded. Scarcely a quarter
frighten me... You’ve seen the princess? Is it true she’s in love with
“Lie down!” cried the adjutant, throwing himself flat on the ground.
“That is Bezúkhova’s brother, Anatole Kurágin,” she said,
that she had become fond of him. Pierre did not in any way seek her
The men in the Russian army were so worn out by this continuous marching
especially appealed to Pierre. The important mystery mentioned by the
up, they became convinced that Moscow would be surrendered, and then
daughter. She lowered her head and was ready to burst into tears.

sister had hung round his neck with such emotion and reverence, “it


“No, I’ll put it off for a bit. I’ll tell you later. You must forgive
general who, watch in hand, was saying it was time they started as all
to. Is it true, as they tell me, that I can’t even go away?”
assumed a subtle expression, he shrugged his shoulders with an air of



field of Austerlitz and had later enlarged upon with Pierre, and which
“Well? How do you feel?” he asked.
German gentlemen won’t win the battle tomorrow but will only make all
peculiarly deliberate steps. This feeling of disdain was heightened
laughter, the shouting of familiar voices, the growling of a bear, and
for which her partner came to seek her, put an end to her discourse with
became disorganized, many were drowned and many surrendered, but those


for the attainment of that purpose.

“True enough,” answered Nesvítski; “two smart fellows could have
“No, you have not understood me,” said his mother, not knowing how

Kaysárov, his adjutant’s brother.
consuming what was set ablaze?

gloomy thoughts that oppressed Sónya. She was glad to find escape

“Nothing,” answered the countess. “If everything is ready let us start.”
“Yes,” said the countess when the brightness these young people had
Lavrúshka about Napoleon and laughed at his stories, and raced one
summer. As Natásha, at her mother’s side, passed through the crowd
among them; but this was told chiefly to introduce Rostopchín’s witty
a thud. Denísov rode past him, leaning back and shouting something.
him, was restraining her sobs. Her face was pale and rigid. Only in the
which the Duc de Bassano based his refusal to deliver them to him would
and silent when the talk related to any topic that had no direct bearing

sarcastic glance toward the militia officer.
not heard his remark. But as soon as she had turned away she felt that
It was becoming more and more dangerous to remain at Bald Hills, and
Guided by some gift of insight, on taking up the management of the


“Deal with him as you think fit! I hand him over to you.”

Natásha. (Ramballe despised both these kinds of love equally: the one
away and conceal himself, but at that moment he saw Makár Alexéevich
and was therefore out of sorts, a state of mind which with her always
Pierre smiled absent-mindedly, evidently not grasping what she said.
popular choice of Kutúzov as commander in chief was received.
inclinations was apparent. She had to eat, sleep, think, speak, weep,
indeed he only had to lie down, to fall asleep like a stone, and he
entrenchments looked out just as menacingly, and the unlimbered cannon
a few steps, turned, cut a caper, brought her little feet sharply
“I am not speaking of regicide, I am speaking about ideas.”
decided now or never. She lowered her eyes so as not to see the gaze

nearly a minute with the steady gaze of a commander and then turned to
“It’s different on different days,” answered the captain. “One
the pre-eminence.

with a wink, and passed on followed by another, an old man.
be corded up. Thanks to Natásha’s directions the work now went on

His mind was not in a normal state. A healthy man usually thinks of,
historical persons, from monarchs to journalists, as the expression of
“What is it, Nicholas?”
almost shouted, not looking Borís in the face.
tenths of the men of our left flank had fallen and the full force of the

“Yes, he is an agreeable young man.... Why do you ask me that?” said
doubt it now. Rostóv rode in the direction pointed out to him, in which



Austerlitz, Wagram, and so on. But now something strange was happening
Tolstóy, Prince Volkónski, Arakchéev, and others—the Emperor reached
The postmaster came in and began obsequiously to beg his excellency to

solidity and strength hereditary in his family. A beard and mustache
Like all the others near the speaker, Prince Andrew looked at him with
tomorrow.”
in his horse, said to him:
dull expression.
owed him money! What baseness! What meanness! I know you understand
“Charmé de vous voir,” * greeted the Rostóvs and Perónskaya in
Bennigsen and the Tsarévich.
they did catch me they’d string me up to an aspen tree, and with all
cut!”
“Perhaps,” coldly and angrily replied Dólokhov, glancing at Sónya,
“This way, uncle,” cried the girl. “We’ll pass through the side street,
deep furrow ran across his forehead, and standing by a window he stared
Seeing his gloomy face as he frowned at his wife, the officers grew
occurrences quite apart from, and unconnected with, the battle. It was
conviction that she was a quite unusual and extraordinary being.
The lower jaw of an old Frenchman with a thick mustache trembled as he

“What trouble would it be to you?” he said. “I have not got one. Please
a folding table and red chairs, then into the drawing room with a round
After Smolénsk Napoleon sought a battle beyond Dorogobúzh at Vyázma, and
closer and he daily discovered fresh spiritual treasures in her.

with a smile of pleasure, held out her slender, delicate hand to him,
she said, convulsively pressing her hands and setting her teeth with a



who had wished to stop the affair ran to a corner of the room and threw
from everybody else.
Now all these men were replaced by Speránski on the civil side, and

around him. An infantryman came to the fire, squatted on his heels, held
forty paces’ distance nothing could be seen. For three minutes all had
managed to utter (to her everything seemed funny). She leaned against
a smile at the young pilgrim.
the campfire. They were quarreling and fighting desperately, each trying
up high on one uplifted hand.
CHAPTER XIII
the gesture of a man too busy to lose a moment, glanced at Kutúzov and,
and he saw above him the remote, lofty, and everlasting sky. He knew it
not wish it. But I am running on too long and am at the end of my second
moment jealous of her past, then reproaching himself for that feeling.

others...”
There were two of them. One was an officer—a tall, soldierly, handsome
forgetting the geographical position of the Niemen, thought that what

her face today. She cried as she said good-by to Uncle,” Sónya

head with its bold features and glittering eyes was resting on his hand.
the Rhine and the Colosseum. The cabmen he met and their passengers,
away from her, and was jealous of Natásha with whom he spent all his



“A town captured by the enemy is like a maid who has lost her honor,”
but the sense of his words spread everywhere because what he said was
events occur solely by the will of a Napoleon, and Alexander, or in
“No, monseigneur, you cannot have known me. I am a militia officer and
him, but no one answered him, everybody was too excited; and Pétya,

table, writing.


where the hottest musket fire and cannonade were heard. Suddenly he
my heart at ease.... Aníska, go, you horrid girl, show him the way!” she
could have been done, that army was already two days’ march farther on
you with my saber!” he shouted, actually drawing his saber from its
pointed out to his father the danger of staying at Bald Hills, so near
smeared with soot for fun nor these women hurrying away nor the burned
and now soaring up with glittering sparks, with here and there dense
accuse him of that)—had not the same conception of the welfare of
show, by disregarding the orders, that she did not believe in medical
her knees after her young lady.
you, but why should I bother about you? You’d be only too glad, of
occurred to none of them that it was three o’clock and time to go to
therefore necessary that everyone should be able to satisfy his passions
He looked at his watch. It was still only four o’clock. He did not feel
the fire of life had seemed extinguished, now flashed with brilliant
in the mist.
taking advantage of it!”
not by men. Men are His instruments, they are not to blame. If you think

her and that she deserved it. “Why does Prince Andrew, who sees this,
anger and distress. But his strength soon began to fail him, and looking

One day he took the countess to a Roman Catholic church, where she knelt
Arakchéev, coming to him from the Emperor, said that Ermólov ought to
The retreat from Málo-Yaroslávets when he had a free road into a
was sacrificing himself for the public good) but himself as governor,
in Pfuel’s own expressions, it was clear that the others knew, and Pfuel
to him: “I hear you are refitting your Petersburg house?”

so-called “philosophical” historians believe, then to determine which
like that six months ago?”
“Show it to me.... Oh, ooh... Oh! Oh, ooh!” his frightened moans could
“Rugáy, hey, hey!” he shouted. “Rugáyushka!” he added,
intention of making love to her. Anatole had no notion and was incapable

had been wounded in the engagement the day before. The peasant drivers,

“What news, sir?” asked the officer, evidently anxious to start a
ruled over.
Strange as it was to her to acknowledge this feeling in herself, yet
projects for peace, a secret peace concluded separately.”

Borís was among the few present at the Niemen on the day the two
childhood; that same Julie Karágina who had been at the Rostóvs’
“No, it’s the chorus from The Water-Carrier, listen!” and Natásha

the hill to the right in the courtyard of the farm, as he called the

“What was it?”
limits of privation a man can endure; but thanks to his physical

an indescribable charm of sorrow and self-forgetfulness that her father

warrior doing some kind of man’s work of his own, without help or

be, but no me....”
these quests and experiments had failed him. And now without thinking
old man’s good-natured expletives, was not merely understood but lay
it all very well for Prince Vasíli told me himself. Besides, Cyril
pe vell. And ve must discuss it as little as po-o-ossible”... he dwelt
who, discerning the will of Providence, submit their personal will to
neighbor on his right quickly turned in alarm to Bezúkhov.
smoke but not moving back from the fire. “And you, Jackdaw, go and fetch
Kutúzov asking whether he wished his calèche to be sent for, Kutúzov in
to exterminate these scoundrels. We too will take part...” the reader
expressed this most eloquently.
repeated. “I should be glad enough to fall asleep, so it’s not my
CHAPTER XII
Borís, grown more manly and looking fresh, rosy and self-possessed,

for the consequences.

difficult to imagine happier people, and that God only knew what would
him through the troops. On reaching the broad river Víliya, he stopped
dragged myself up, so that my leg hung down on one side and my body on
broken glass remained in that position without taking his eyes from the
again.
Russian army! Well, as I was saying,” he continued, recovering his
they used instead of salt was even pleasant; there was no great cold,

had been the preparation of some papers he meant to leave at his death
“Only that?” said Bolkónski.
three weeks surrounded by a court that included princes, dukes, kings,
still greater purity and clearness what they were both feeling.
hopes of saving his life. She took turns with her beside his sofa, and
saber had tasted flesh and he had fallen exhausted, and so on. And so he
violins played very shrilly and merrily and one of the women with thick
portrait (evidently by the hand of the artist belonging to the estate)
But the staff officer did not finish what he wanted to say. A cannon
message to Kutúzov, perhaps even to the sovereign himself. The morning
    * “Hang these Russians!”
behaved with a particularly dignified and sad deference. This shade
Petersburg to Moscow it is usually with the object of marrying an
Kutúzov turned round without answering and his eye happened to fall
“Can’t you make less noise?”
Got up at eight, read the Scriptures, then went to my duties. (By Joseph
songs to fascinate her husband would have seemed as strange as to adorn

have looked, if nothing had been done, if there had not been those pills
His large, glittering, masculine eyes were so close to hers that she saw

like a child, he fell into a deep, youthful slumber.
When, much later, “Uncle” rode up to Nicholas and began talking
it,” said she, dropping her eyes shamefacedly.
hands were symmetrically placed on the green silk quilt, the palms


by the Emperor to discuss the general course of affairs, he respectfully
be so jealous about game and dogs. For myself, I can tell you, Count,

The mummers (some of the house serfs) dressed up as bears, Turks,
reconciliation was being made, but he definitely instructed Balashëv to
not have happened. Tell me, for God’s sake, what will Russia, our mother
dun-colored, with light mane and tail, and when he rode it no one could

to the house when there was a girl of seventeen there, for fear of
Pierre looked over his spectacles with naïve surprise, now at him and

complete, joyous sense of freedom which constituted his happiness at
Majesty’s service demands that the army should be rallied at Smolénsk

The esaul, screwing up his light-colored eyes, nodded approvingly.
case proofs were needed; he had waited a whole month for them and grew
between women was established between Princess Mary and Natásha. They



marriage was Hélène’s mother, Princess Kurágina. She was continually
began reciting some French verses describing her guilty love for her
your victory is not a matter for great rejoicing and that you can’t be
was next to himself the most important guest. The old people sat with
uniform that had become too tight for him. He was agitated;
two officials a thrashing, and dislocated the arm of one of them.
“It’s empty.”

found.”
simplicity.

away. Involuntarily recalling his wife’s past and her relations with
same.... Is everything ready?” he added. “Only tell me where to go
She was no longer in the loose gown she generally wore in the morning,
Princess Mary really was disconcerted and red patches came on her face

CHAPTER XVII
he added: “But beware, dear brother, that these gloves do not deck

perform a great deed, and to save his life—the life of M. Ramballe,


how much anxiety one has had to go through that we might rejoice in
“He is a man in a gray overcoat, very anxious that I should call
Kutúzov could not yet admit the possibility of retreating beyond Moscow
wearing the Cross of St. George, awarded to soldiers for bravery in
have expended millions, when you are in alliance with England, and when

most part to be spoken at a moment of victory and triumph, generally
her sympathy for Pierre, but by involuntary intonations and a half smile
death? Not the men on the commission that had first examined him—not one
master’s thoughts. He guessed that the question referred to Prince
Julie on the contrary accepted his attentions readily, though in a
historic character is first the product of his time, and his power only
return the holy image.
he continued, returning to the talk in the study which had evidently
know how fond the count is of her.”
“We can harness at once, your excellency.”
Dusk had fallen, and the roar of guns died away. Pierre lay leaning on
entrenchments, and the places where, in line with them, the field
amiabilities shown her during dinner by Borís Drubetskóy, who was
returning his smile.
Dólokhov looked round but did not say anything, nor did the mocking
realize it his efforts are fruitless.
leaving them alone, even when they did not wish it. When Prince Andrew
have one, I will pay the man well, and...”
“Commit ourselves to God,” Natásha inwardly repeated. “Lord God, I
dissatisfied. For a long time, oaths, angry shouts, and fighting could
were already close to the wall, and from the gallery resounded the

This curious contradiction is not accidental. Not only does it occur at
chivalrous, noble, and gentle.

were shouting something loudly and incoherently. A gallant-looking
Nicholas took the two letters, one of which was from his mother and
father and Anna Mikháylovna, that it had something to do with her
smiling joyfully; and snatching the shawl from the footman, whom he

anything to get just what he liked done always. He had only to express a
The day after his interview with Count Arakchéev, Prince Andrew spent
saying. He screwed up his eyes with a dissatisfied look as he gazed
fight another battle, and since then the government property had been

The only resource obviously presenting itself to the old count was to

acquaintance.’ In a word, those gentlemen, Gascons indeed, so
thought, “seriously, I have long been thinking of it.... Leading such
that weally still going on?”
address Rostóv by his title, as if in recognition of his confession.

the Emperor Napoleon, and in the upper circles of Petersburg there was
Do not break your ranks on the plea of removing the wounded! Let every
And having kissed Denísov he ran out of the hut.
drawing in her breath.
would be treated not as a sovereign, but as a criminal. Quite lately,
CHAPTER VI
Nicholas promised to come and blushed again as he bowed. At the mention
Pierre was one of those people who, in spite of an appearance of what
Then suddenly, dismayed lest he had said too much, Pétya stopped and
one would have expected of him.
one else. At that time the two famous decrees were being prepared
“Where are you going?” asked an infantry officer who was eating an
into my mind that I was already tired of it all, and that we must all
the Lodge, told the password, and at last was permitted to sit down.
effect upon Pierre; it constricted his limbs and destroyed the

everything, and ecstatic pity and love for that man overflowed his happy
of his book with his old hands which from excitement he could not keep
    * To indicate he did not want more tea.

While Pierre was running the few steps that separated him from the
from its original principles. And so toward the end of the year he went
experiencing a new and peculiar pleasure. Sónya, muttering to herself,
the first second. “A baby? What baby...? Why is there a baby there? Or
“Plea...” began Dólokhov, but could not at first pronounce the
The demands of life, which had seemed to her annihilated by her father’s

Pierre went down the corridor, trying to avoid making a noise or meeting
All eyes were gazing at her with one and the same expression. She
had thought of all the young ladies without exception whom he had met
and handed him a sodden envelope.
the command of the detested foreigner Barclay, whose rank was inferior
As long as this news remained unofficial it was possible to doubt it,
“What do you think?” Véra was saying with an arch smile. “You are

ordinary language as the lowest depth of baseness which every child
Nicholas was the first to meet her, as the countess’ room could only be
Not finding the young prince in his study the valet went with the
“He is sleeping well as it is, after a sleepless night.”
seemed to wish, but to be unable, to diminish its effect.

walk?”
motionless presenting arms, looked again straight into Alexander’s
thought and which had formerly seemed to her so far away and improbable,
“See how smart she’s made herself! Oh, the devils!”
Andrew.
when he came that morning. Pierre had been taken by one set of soldiers
all sides logs were being hewn, new houses built, and old, charred ones
glance at all those in the room and noticing the count’s confessor
excellency!”
unreasonably angry with his servant and squadron quartermaster.
the Emperor had been at headquarters for a month. Each of the three
his regiment and was soon taken as orderly by a general commanding a
he was doing; the thought of meeting the Emperor at any moment was so
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,
was that his former stern and determined expression had altered to one
never understand it, because you’ve never loved anyone. You have no
Natásha gave him her hand and went out. Princess Mary on the other hand
without looking at the man he was addressing, and did not reply to
by a sword.
under the former order of things—threatening to give a serious turn
Mary’s letter. “Can it be that it is all over?” she thought.
out accidently.”
who had brought a letter from his wife, the Countess Hélène, he felt
A countless number of free forces (for nowhere is man freer than during

man never submits to the deductions of these experiments and arguments.
on the other hand. “But, Mamma, is he very much in love? What do you
eagerly forward to help him off with his cloak and take his hat and
coiffure, Mademoiselle Bourienne’s and Anatole’s smiles, and the
but at that instant the galling thought occurred to him that he might
legs and turned-out toes, climbed the hill with difficulty.) Prince
son made no rejoinder, but it was evident that whatever arguments were

had restrained it, he no longer feared death and ceased to think about
carriage, her husband was adjusting his saber; Prince Hippolyte, under
sometimes involuntarily fixed on him. She knew that her going in during
skillfully changed the subject. He asked him to tell them how and where
“May the devil take them—the traitors!”
realize what had happened to her, but was unable either to understand
In the domain of jurisprudence, which consists of discussions of how a
but as soon as one gets to business nothing is ready, and the enemy,
had any news. On their familiar faces he read agitation and alarm.
Langeron, with a subtly ironical smile, again glancing round for support
does it matter what we take away? Only look what is going on in the
absence: “High time, my dear, high time! We were all weary of waiting
The prince was silent and looked indifferent. But, with the womanly and
army really began to improve from the time of that march, it does not at

implore you, come at once if you do not wish to make me and the whole
“Oh, you are there!” said Sónya with a start, and came near and
“There will be a council of war at Kutúzov’s tonight, though; you

Rostóv took the money, avoiding Telyánin’s eyes, and went out of the
Having by a great effort got away to the left from that flood of men,
“You always have such strange fancies! I didn’t even think of being
look which was fixed on him, but him she could not see, she only saw
obviously strange to her to think that this stern handsome man should be
ending Pierre’s unpleasant and unamiable outburst. After the anecdote
surprised those he met by his significantly happy looks and smiles which

Perónskaya was quite ready. In spite of her age and plainness she
you cry, Sónya, dear love, darling Sónya!” and she kissed her and
likelier one.”
night.”
Anatole rose and went into the dining room. Balagá was a famous troyka
On the evening of the last day’s march an order had been received that
absolutely necessary and, seizing a moment when Prince Andrew was alone,
as a mother. As it is, not only has she left us, and particularly Prince

before, and a group of Russians, both men and women, gathered about him.
stroke of his arm had supernaturally become impotent.
understood that this woman might belong to him.
All the unmarried ladies and even the married ones except the very
of the field he stood on was well-known and familiar ground. Though he
before, some playing cards (there was plenty of money, though there was
greater embarrassment. She again glanced rapidly from Pierre’s face to
line—the officers had been unable to keep sight-seers away. The


armies made their presence known, but later when they reached the
of possessing it agitated and awed him.
Unwilling to obtrude himself on the princess, Rostóv did not go back to
she felt guilty.
position with his eyes shut. Pierre looked at him and had not time
rustle of her dress and even her breathing could be heard. Everything
lovely! She is quite equal to Márya Antónovna. See how the men, young

Boguchárovo house. The peasants were briskly carrying out the
“Yes, yes!” Natásha murmured as if in vexation. Then she sighed
“Go!” he repeated, amazed at himself and glad to see the look of

there is no complete inevitability but a certain measure of freedom
progression with a common ratio of one tenth, and have found the sum of
shadows round his eyes, alone sat in his place barefoot and not dressed.
window sill, with a pale but radiant face.
“Thank God!” said the voice. “And Father?”
with such admiration and delight of the farming of the thrifty and

quarreled with Hélène, mon cher? You are under a delusion,” said
silence and the regular tramp of feet beating the ground in unison, one
The party of the old and dissatisfied, who censured the innovations,


Anatole sat at a table frowning and biting his lips.

places where he could not possibly take part in a battle. As long as
men belonged was as clearly defined in his mind as the category of
that curled up from the rotating black ball. “I cannot, I do not wish to
yet everything is so strange, so strange! I can’t make it out. I don’t

let Tíkhon undress him.
Project Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
rid himself of them he closed his eyes.

deafening roar, crackling, and whistling made his ears tingle.

had done to the things on the table. He flushed and went up to Nicholas.
were greater and more resourceful, Nicholas felt himself cornered. This
our rear guard (that is, immediately after the fight at Gridnëva), and
Just then the countess came in from the sitting room with a weary and
from Davout, who was now called Prince d’Eckmühl, to turn the Russian
his letter would be read by the Emperor, and therefore weighed every
higher government circles.

defend Vílna. You are cut in two and have been driven out of the Polish

should let that fine fellow Bonaparte loose—he’d knock all this nonsense


her handkerchief too. Pierre was kissed, and he kissed the beautiful
“God be with you, general!” said the Emperor.
stockings and dancing shoes, stood looking animated and bright in the
is not my fault that I want it and want nothing but that and live only
his confusion, instantly continued in the same pleasant tones:
with him to the troyka.
recruits were being enrolled in the villages, and from the seat of

    CHAPTER XV
The prisoners were brought down from the battery and among them was
diplomatic corps and the Emperor himself were to be present.

Armfeldt disputes, Bennigsen considers, and Barclay, called on to act,
marsh. The French were evidently firing and shouting at him.

He did not drive into the town, but put up at an inn in the Dorogomílov
“You are tired—try to sleep.”
in which man is situated, that knowledge can never be complete, for the
gladdening effect on him. Pétya and Natásha surprised Nicholas
But even admitting as correct all the cunningly devised arguments with
Denísov came out of the watchman’s hut and, having called Pétya, gave
“A fine lad! My word! A fine lad!... His father lies on his deathbed
count.
kindly, and round. When Pierre saw his neighbor next morning at dawn
undressing, while—instead of Mademoiselle Bourienne—a serf boy read to
sount ze retreat!”
unmarried, and even the happier for it?” So thought Prince Bolkónski
to legends of Alësha the Sly, or the priest’s laborer Mikólka.
Alexander spent the evening at the entertainment given by his

“Ah, Countess,” he said at last, “that’s a European talent, she
Pierre suddenly saw an outlet for his excitement. He hardened his heart
air she considered indispensable for a girl on such an occasion. But,
evidently pleased him, and latterly he had persistently, and as it
the party of the young had triumphed. The voices of those who counseled

perfection of manner. If he ever thought of Hélène, it was just of
Andrew, “that all the atrocities of the French army (I nearly said of



Pétya, leaning on his elbow, fell asleep at once. Natásha and Nicholas
firing?” Rostóv kept asking as he came up to Russian and Austrian
“Yes, you do not know Him, my dear sir,” said the Mason. “You
To live for myself avoiding those two evils is my whole philosophy
Napoleon frowned and sat silent for a long time leaning his head on his
They’ve killed a man, lads!”
and though Julie (now Princess Drubetskáya), who had resumed
addressing first one, then another. He said he would not have been
stopped at the gate, and the latch rattled as someone tried to open it.
    * Anna Pávlovna.
face, shook his head, and going up to him silently kissed him on the

Wolzogen returned from Barclay and said that General Barclay wished to


Pierre was the sixth to enter. He was conducted through a glass gallery,
knoll; if they had retreated they would have withdrawn from that too....
upon her. Later on she recalled how she had asked her father to let
Moscow society. For a long time he could not reconcile himself to the
his knee.


everyone knelt down and sang a prayer. All these things were repeatedly
Without considering what he would do he moved unconciously with quick,
(3) His relation to the causes leading to the action.
making an effort to listen, but could not do so.
An Anonymous Volunteer, and David Widger
thought it his duty to assure him that he was not French and wished to
duties on you, and you must be a man.”
are we afraid? I am not to blame that the Minister is vacillating,
inevitability, to destroy the conception of the soul, of good and evil,
Natásha without knowing it was all attention: she did not lose a word,
turning to the sergeant major. “Tell them to send me to hospital; I’m
“Yes, it will,” Natásha answered reluctantly.

“I know. It is not right, darling!”
proclamation.”
“Dear me! Then what are you up to now?”
Vladímirovich is my mother’s second cousin. He’s also my Bóry’s
So that examining the relation in time of the commands to the events,
eagerness and briskness presented a marked contrast to the dissatisfied
closed his eyes, silently let Mack enter his room before him, and closed
actions that seem to us less free the better we understand their cause.
of its tireless hind wheels, and began arranging the breech-band on his
not to come to the drawing room when he called to see her aunt—that it
as if to ascertain whether his father’s habits had changed since he

family, was the most gifted with a capacity to feel any shades of
was always conscious of his own guilt toward him for having wasted the
there had seemed no escape. She wrote that the last unfortunate
With the soldier, an infantry officer with a bandaged cheek came up to
old custom, the count had drunk a silver cupful of mulled brandy, taken
irritably and she went to the window and opened it. Through the open


Though not much time had passed since Prince Andrew had left Russia, he
fingers of his right, listened to Rostóv as a general listens to the
we’ll set off.”

to get away on foot and had no means of obtaining a conveyance. Rostóv
Toward evening a noncommissioned officer entered with two soldiers and


pale like Vereshchágin.
girl was Pétya. A clown was Dimmler. An hussar was Natásha, and a
monuments and tradition of that period.

Le charmant Hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinary resemblance

happiness in life, that in a fit of absent-mindedness she sat still, her
foreigner who sees her, even if ignorant of her significance as the

heard low voices which seemed to be whispering.
several times to wake Pétya that he might eat something, but he
their stories. Denísov was moodily silent all the evening.


to drive straight home. But the nearer he drew to the house the more he

up after four o’clock. The people did not at once realize the meaning of
to the left, cut off the Vice-King (Murat) and capture him.

“Fine doings!” answered Dmítrievna. “For fifty-eight years have I lived

question, “What for?” a simple answer was now always ready in his soul:
In the night he called his valet and told him to pack up to go to
Pierre the following prophecy concerning Napoleon, drawn from the

From the Shevárdino Redoubt where Napoleon was standing the flèches were
wife. At that moment this all seemed quite easy, simple, and clear to
every step, but the universal historians’ accounts are all made up of
of human feeling, strained to the utmost, that had held the crowd in
Hardly had Borís gone than Sónya, flushed, in tears, and muttering
from the hints contained in his letter and given by the little princess,


he was told that he would now see the lesser light. The bandage was
whispered, “straight to the Lyádov uplands.”

“Erzá, darling!” Ilágin wailed in a voice unlike his own. Erzá
     * “That Asiatic city of the innumerable churches, holy
series of continuous events and examine it apart from others, though
But though they all realized that it was necessary to get away, there
influential men on the staff would be stirred up by this news,
laughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomte
“On the feeling that is in me and in him,” he pointed to Timókhin, “and
buckwheat porridge and vodka for both of them.
ourselves.”
in Countess Bezúkhova’s presence. To be received in the Countess
everyone, including Anna Pávlovna, felt this.
Napoleon with even greater warmth than the year before. Orders were
incomprehensible, supernatural force—a miracle—one cannot admit that
attention of a relative. The count, pipe in hand, was pacing up and down
and her short, downy, smiling lip lifted when she began to speak just as
“The count’s things? Bring them here,” she said, pointing to the
course of ideas which guided his decisions merely gave them his final
The members and guests of the club wandered hither and thither, sat,
to business in front of a map, where he would feel at home. He nodded
Andrew’s ears long after he had left the house.
of the people’s will but are accidents dependent on cunning, on
considered worthy to hear it had to come to the countess, for she

story that had no connection with the previous conversation. For a few
observation, and experience, but had he possessed all the faculties he
A volley was heard, and some bullets whistled past, while others plashed


the sergeant to meet some mounted men who were riding along the line.
began writing in pencil on a page he tore out. He wrote to his sister:
up and began watching the movements of our troops below, as plainly


Volkónski was called out of the church and received a dispatch from

free.’ Isn’t that lovely and noble! Yes, very noble? Isn’t it?”
without any incendiarism.
ball, flying close to him, caused him to duck and bend over his horse.
certain period of time (in the first case the unknown quantity is the

position of the Russian people. There were the same receptions and
yes, there was something else important, very important, that I was
know why she had to, she knew the meeting would be painful, but felt the
venomously retorted on the inexperienced young man, “but I know on good

in reaching the Emperor—he even thought how surprised everyone would be
first because Pierre appeared to his hussar eyes as a rich civilian, the
doubt him, but he seemed to me insincere, and all the time I stood

officer had to say, took the papers from him without a word.

evening the admission took place. The new decoration of the Premises

right and high up in the sky was the sickle of the waning moon and
This meant that Tíkhon was not handing him the waistcoat he wanted.
is to have an armed frontier and a firm policy, and he will never dare
entrusted. The more he realized the absence of all personal motive in
doctor’s wife.

vanished. He waited for the first pause in the conversation, and then
everything.”
opening, but forgets that at each stage of the game there were similar
uniform with plumes in his hat went up to Kutúzov and said something
“Know that if you stir up Prussia against me, I’ll wipe it off the map
were always some. Then she had dinner, a substantial and appetizing meal
drooped.
    CHAPTER II
historians themselves tell us that from Smolénsk onwards he wished
any heroic feelings), and the whole innumerable multitude of such
Before the officer had finished speaking the orderly made the same

general raising his voice at the card table, and the samovar and the tea
“You saw him?” urged Natásha, seizing her hand.
that he was entangled but becoming more and more so at every step, and
straight ahead, leading his men under fire, without considering in his

his own words.


“Let us go to her, I must say good-by. Or—go and wake and I’ll
smiling as if she did not recognize him.

Pierre.
long since and often occurred to him during his military activities—the
Pierre and himself was in the room, and addressed her in a tone of
estime que je professe pour the Orthodox Russian army, j’avoue que
Kutúzov alone used all his power (and such power is very limited in the

“All right, all right,” replied the commander, and turned to Major
rapidly began:
now approached the sick man with the noiseless step of one in full vigor
“Uncle,” and setting her arms akimbo also made a motion with her
taking her hand led her up the rickety wooden steps of the porch. The
Moscow, and to this Shinshín’s witticism was added—that for that alone
“Yes,” replied Pierre with the smile of mild irony now habitual to him.

spite of his evident wish to do so he could not give them a joyous
reading. The books he read were chiefly historical, and on these he


carry out his intention. He struggled against the confession of his


fine fellow—your friend—I like him! He stirs me up. Another says
the door learned that another letter had been delivered.
a paper that lay before him, did not look up. Without raising his eyes,
“Good-by.”
of lies!
strange as it may seem to suppose that the slaughter of eighty thousand
was!”

into the deliberations of the nobility. Pierre stepped forward and
patriotism of the Russian people. Another general stood in a martial
one’s most distant past in which dreams and realities blend—and they
letter, but had specially inserted in the rescript to Saltykóv and had

alien to him and brimful of joys unknown to him, a different world,
coughing of the musicians were heard from the gallery.
to Petersburg, look round, and choose your profession. I will agree to
vocation is to be happy with another kind of happiness, the happiness
remarked: “How quiet you young people are!”
asking about his friend’s last days.

tipsy shouts behind him: “Get on! Get on!” when it was impossible
But either from fatigue or want of sleep he was ill-disposed for work
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
scoundrel? Is that how you look at it? We don’t see it like that. And

black figures of hussars, but in the distance was still the same misty
governments began). “I told them just one thing in Petersburg.”
1813 and the restoration of the Bourbons were due to other things beside
this marriage. He recalled her former words and looks and the words
astronomy, physics, chemistry, botany, zoology, and so on, just in the
the army was a great grief to me. This young man, of whom I spoke to you

(Pierre was sixth), and were led to the post. Several drums suddenly

all communication with men of that stamp and to leave here as soon as
incline to make it something like a road. The wounded, bandaged with
did this and that, all would be well; and he did what was demanded of
under his weight alone. The men looked at him and pressed to the
beautiful head and looking over her classically molded shoulder as she
anyone if he is in disfavor. Now come here.”

shouted hoarsely.
wrong. Discharge me, for God’s sake!”
“He does not look like a common man,” said the interpreter, after a
become a habit. Schemes and devices for which he never rightly accounted
cassock, sat on the sofa beside her, behind a samovar. Near them, in an
former days. Her features were more defined and had a calm, soft,
direction toward the valley and disappearing one after another into

a consciousness is communicated is very difficult to define, but it
and seemed quite exhausted. On approaching the fire he had been going to
a foraging expedition. Rostóv in his cadet uniform, with a jerk to his

descend upon the vanquished. I must be magnanimous and truly great. But
down in his carriage.
his father who had brought it from the siege of Ochákov. All these
Pétya was standing at the door when Denísov said this. He slipped in
silent as he passed by, and moved to make way for him. At first Pierre
or occasioned the migrations can no longer be regarded as the cause.
incessantly. A little behind the guns stood infantry. When ascending


accompanying him to the hall.
CHAPTER XVII
morning or evening than night. On the way Pierre remembered that Anatole
The feeling, “It has begun! Here it is!” was seen even on Prince

considered it his duty as a doctor to pose as a man whose every moment
“Oh, you don’t understand anything! Don’t talk nonsense, just
If the will of every man were free, that is, if each man could act as he
Peasants having no clear idea of the cause of rain, say, according to
then not be able to marry Princess Mary as they would be within the
Nicholas suddenly felt a desire and need to tell his most intimate
“My God! What does it all mean?” thought he. “And here, where at
with his thin neck exposed by his turn-down collar, toward the place
modesty she had always felt between herself and other men. She did not
the same reminiscences.
a quick eye, and resolution.... And what role is your young monarch
alight, and let her pass into the house before him. Old Tíkhon, wearing
really found it. When he sat with his elbows on the dusty writing table
sons and thieves and wobbahs....”
others and, in shirt sleeves and breeches, went glass in hand to the
aerial living sound, the only reply is a disconnected buzzing from
drawing him down put her arm round his thin, scraggy neck.
saying?”
behind, where his French valet and others were packing the last of his
do everything, not very well but not badly. He baked, cooked, sewed,

“A soldier on leave—a shirt outside breeches,” he would say.
into Princess Mary’s heart as the tone of his voice.

“Oh, every bullet has its billet,” answered Váska Denísov, turning
Petersburg I felt (I can say this to you) that the whole affair would go
stopped the company.” Dólokhov breathed heavily from weariness and
“If they’re sent out and brought back again later on it will do no harm,
him instructions and occasionally glancing disapprovingly at the
do me the favor.”
started, glanced round at him, and screening the candle with her hand
“Natásha, you are sixteen. At your age I was married. You say Borís
with their plumes, ribbons, and medals, both courtiers and military
nineteenth, a great, excitedly bustling activity began which lasted till
which all vital organic and elemental events occur. And the botanist
up the scrap of a grenade that had killed an aide-de-camp standing near
just visible behind a screen. A small dog began to bark.
had come out from Moscow, joined them. This brilliant company separated
the carts with the wounded, the ringing bells, the slanting rays of the
riverbanks and in Borodinó. A white church could be seen through the
declare his feelings to Princess Mary. And he knew that he would never


the sense of youth, animation, and determination that had come on him
copse, a small place a mile and a half from the house.)
in the right. Balashëv began to feel uncomfortable: as envoy he feared
ever heard him utter a groan or a word of complaint. From morning till
to you!” And Márya Dmítrievna touched her arm. “Listen when I speak!
entering the misty region with a sound of hoofs and wheels and now and
activity, quite opposed to the spiritual world in which till now she
“Impossible!” exclaimed Rostóv.
as they said in Moscow society. He seemed to be condescending to
could be seen, and in three places to left and right the French troops
fellow could have played such a prank on a policeman.

“The rice too?”
activities of 160,000 Russians and French—all their passions, desires,
so convulsively that her bare little shoulders shook. Natásha’s
seat. As they drove along he shuddered and exclaimed several times so
and sit. This morning I turned them all out and now look, it’s full
“Oh, no,” agreed the other.
sit down, but fell. The other, a short sturdy soldier with a shawl
over in his mind.
Makár Alexéevich in the evening. I shall be there.”

“Come over here, Hélène, dear,” said Anna Pávlovna to the
Mademoiselle Bourienne, the cause of her misery, but also to the man who
morning.



still when she’s fifty.”
to anyone that the wounded should be left behind and the goods carted
his wish for a gallop across a level field; and in the same way the
place him on a stretcher that had been brought. The soldier groaned.
executed is impossible, not only in the case of Napoleon’s invasion of
him an answer.
right thing and not at all worse than a swallow-tail or frock coat.
inability to enter a room and converse in it was, however, redeemed by
at the map, but at Prince Andrew’s face.
Having galloped safely through the French, he reached a field behind
A young officer with a bewildered and pained expression on his face

emperor, kings, and princes who had deserved it, reprimanded the kings

to him about politics. Prince Andrew and the others gathered round these

aunt on her mother’s side, a rich, childless widow who always lived in
Nicholas Bolkónski.”
will recite at my house tonight and there’ll be some people, and if
dispatched that old man also to Petersburg to negotiate.
one thing only—his future happiness. Sometimes it seemed to him that

music, now into something dazzlingly brilliant and triumphant.
people speak when recalling an insult. “But I did not summon you to
at the steaming boiler, waiting till the sample, which a quartermaster
up the Frenchman had already fallen. “Too late again!” flashed through
On the eighteenth and nineteenth of November, the army advanced two
forming up within twice the range of a musket shot. The general in
“You see he writes,” said she, showing her son a letter of Prince

wish that Kurágin should be banished from Moscow. The whole house was in
“Listen, dear Annette,” said the prince, suddenly taking Anna
features, which had been gloomy, suddenly lighted up, and while still
respectful attitude of the younger men to the old man in his dotage was
east to west.
themselves in most depressing conditions to have a justification for
troops who had for a time lost touch with the Russians, and projects
had fallen in battle. From this beginning the succeeding terms of the
Dólokhov put away the money, called a footman whom he ordered to bring
children’s property! You said yourself that we have a hundred thousand

Princess Mary might do so if she chose, but they were not to be admitted
the women at home, two brothers away earning wages, and only Michael the
Langeron, trying as virulently as possible to sting Weyrother’s vanity
sat waiting for something, and again soldiers straggling from their
of inviting the other to take a seat beside him. Pierre felt reluctant


“Have the biscuits and rice been served out to the regiments of the
He alone could play on the clavichord that écossaise (his only piece)
as the Russian commanders did not wish, or were not in time, to begin a
spoke as if his sole aim were to put a given number of questions—the
sent for Balashëv and read him his letter to Napoleon, ordered him to
right. This match was with Julie Karágina, the daughter of excellent

“What does this fellow want?” shouted one of them referring to Pierre.
Count Ilyá Rostóv, hurried and preoccupied, went about in his soft
Pierre seemed disconcerted and embarrassed. He was talking to the
speak about it, but as you ask me I will give you my frank opinion. If
that she understood not only what he said but also what he wished to,

A tall, beautiful woman with a mass of plaited hair and much exposed
Were the Potëmkins, Suvórovs, and Orlóvs Germans? No, lad, either you

of all these words and all this trouble was, after converting her to
midnight she went to Natásha’s room fingering the key in her pocket.
And the old servant got down from the box and went up to the cart.
“Gracious heavens! The young count!” he cried, recognizing his
the deputation.
with bright, attentive, and animated eyes, as if trying to understand
“Does he love you?”
to see the action of the farthest gun and looked at him with curiosity.

CHAPTER XIX


looks the visitors cast on him seemed to say: “And what is he sitting
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
wealth of Moscow and the strength of its plunderers was destroyed. But
together with the latest of Vasíli Lvóvich Púshkin’s bouts rimés.
known that it was costing him a thousand rubles, and that he would not
They are neither fit for war nor peace! Barclay is said to be the
a storm at the square, cut his way in, slashed right and left, how his

beauty as she glided away. “And how she carries herself! For so young
“There! What did I say?” said Alpátych, coming into his own again. “It’s
experience and observation she had of life, the greater was her wonder
and the corners of the white house in the distance, all stood out in the

began to fall. Prince Andrew turned away and began pacing the room.
They were silent for a while.

and, regardless of whether any “gentlemen of the embassy” were
face.

of chemical affinity, or of the vital force, forms the content of
In the darkness of the night one of the servants noticed, above the high

By the wall of China-Town a smaller group of people were gathered round
As if this action had some mysterious and menacing significance, the

felt rather than what he thought.

With regard to legal matters, after the execution of the supposed
River and the timber yards by the Dorogomílov Bridge, were all ablaze.
woman, handing the little girl to her. “Give her back to them, give her
and devotion, or of weariness and hope of resting before long. Prince
“Confound you and your Karl Ivánich!” He took the glass with the

fresh as ever!”
seemed to ask. She noticed at once that something had happened to him.

“Well then, be quick. We’ll all have breakfast together.”

To understand the laws of this continuous movement is the aim of
which he found himself.

and wished he could tell what, if anything, this man was thinking
our three chief aims: (1) Self-knowledge—for man can only know himself
idlers have failed to beat the Germans. Since the world began everybody
felt his friend’s absence very much, having no news of him since he
She passed the valet, the snuff fell from the candle wick, and she saw
and still more this disrespectful, application of brute force to
CHAPTER XII

mortified Nicholas. In the first place he was sorry that Natásha, for
surface and demanded satisfaction. From that evening she seemed to have
on man—a happiness of the soul alone, the happiness of loving. Every man
commanders are: Herr General Wimpfen, le Comte de Langeron, le Prince de
family life continually rose in her imagination. She drove them away and
my dear. One day you are dull, and the next you refuse to see anyone.”
not exist for her.
had been got ready for him, glancing now and then at the newcomer, who,

The first was a feeling of the necessity of sacrifice and suffering in
veil from the secret of the countess’ malady, an unwary young man


right.”

had endured to gain her end.


“Seven new and three old imperials.”
thought of what she would be like when he was an old man, taking her
Behind them along the narrow, sodden, cutup forest road came hussars in
whole. Like a cat, she had attached herself not to the people but to the
BOOK TEN: 1812

of his whip fell on the apron of the equipage. The woman screamed
middle of a small room containing baggage. Another man—Timókhin—was
It seemed to him that he was thinking of nothing, but far down and
her. The count was more perturbed than ever by the condition of his
“If you had told me sooner, Mamma, I would have gone,” she replied

was reduced to thirty-six thousand, though not more than five thousand
the feet of Thy faithful servants! For Thou art the defense, the succor,
arrangements, but instead of that I have the honor to serve here in
“Gentlemen,” said Dólokhov after he had dealt for some time.


party leader. So that the greater part of the events of history—civil
“Attack indeed!” said the colonel in a bored voice, puckering up his
Having passed the Guards and traversed an empty space, Rostóv, to avoid
An official ran out, said some words to a merchant, called a stout
adjutant by his elaborate courtesy appeared to wish to ward off any
My father then insisted on a delay of a year and now already six months,
several times that morning had tried to set to work, but her heart was
soldiers of the third squadron tossed him too, and shouted “hurrah!”
The first troops started at once, and during the night they marched
“It is now my turn to ask you ‘why?’ mon cher,” said Bolkónski.
our good.
“It would be good,” thought Prince Andrew, glancing at the icon his
abandoned by its inhabitants to be burned. They went away each on his

beautiful, and majestic city; and a strange and majestic moment! In what
atmosphere. They marched with handkerchiefs tied over their noses and
person she happened to look at she was in love with for that moment.
deprived,” he thought as he lay in the semidarkness of the quiet hut,
Bolkónski, Prince Andrew Bolkónski,” she went on with special
    * “We must let him off the u!”
When you stand expecting the overstrained string to snap at any moment,
it seemed that if they admitted that truth it would destroy faith in
began to talk to him and make him admit that there was no cause for his
“One thing has come on top of another: her rags to buy, and now a
Denísov was out of sorts both because of the rain and also from hunger
in the small circular room. Around the table all who were at Count
“I will come in all the same, I have to look through the books,” said
There was a bridge ahead of him, where other soldiers stood firing.

himself up to such an extent that it seemed he could not have sustained
a paper from his writing table. “Here!” and he handed it to Prince

refrained long from bursting into a peal of ringing laughter even before
this same idea. This idea is le bien public, the hypothetical welfare of

in the meadow behind the village, three of them are dragging something.
and his son.”
she added hurriedly. “No, don’t be angry, but promise! I have asked
which he was evidently in need. A further proof to Pierre of his own
expressed to Pierre, he diligently followed all that went on, received

quite forgetting the part he had intended to play. “He is an unfortunate
And the old cavalry captain, Kírsten, shouted enthusiastically and no
change the other’s views and without condemning him, but with the quiet,
by little began to pass into a state of intoxication she had not

other that woman was leading the life she preferred? What did it matter
so any more!” By evening this thought had ripened in every soul. At any
a comforting belief in future life, retribution, recompense, and
all the men, old and young, in uniform and evening dress, and all the
from the other side of the door, and the officer—with pale face and

full uniform and prepared to visit the commander in chief. His calèche
sleep beside his companions.
shade of the nearest house, on a bench which one Cossack had run

appeased. Many other victims have perished and are perishing for the

“But every time there have been conquests there have been conquerors;
bluntly—staining the honor of a soldier?”
self-confident limitations of this man raise him to the head of the
fist for fear of losing what it holds, and therefore perishes, the
Something was boiling in a small cauldron at the edge of the fire and
Napoleon met Balashëv cheerfully and amiably. He not only showed no sign
    * Forty-two.
young lady visitor and the countess’ eldest daughter (who was four
the only intimate person now remaining to her, was exposed. She was
Kolochá—which crosses the highroad not at a right angle but at an acute
will be passed on to headquarters.’ I go to the commissioner. I enter,
fellow repeated one after the other, and they moved up the street

there in giving concerts in the choir? I don’t like it, it’s just
of the Uhlans. They swooped down close to the French dragoons, something



herself. In saying this Natásha was sincere in acknowledging Mary’s
When the fit of laughter that had seized him at Tíkhon’s words and smile
Nicholas. Yes! If I don’t sleep for three nights I’ll not leave this
used to it or getting to love it, I shall go farther. I will go on till

was the duty of every man; that...” They interrupted him, for this
were Nicholas and Sónya, the niece. Sónya was a slender little
to be talking to a staff officer of such importance. “It’s a lovely
“You mean the left flank?” asked Kaysárov.
might have been more decisive had the commander in chief not been so
because the mere sound of her tender, caressing tones soothed her
regarded by people as the acme of intelligence and refinement, and they
“Oh, do you know? While you were talking in the study I was looking at
The captain had their senior sergeant called in, and in a stern voice
Dólokhov whistled. The whistle was answered, and a maidservant ran out.
securing that peace was really Kutúzov’s; this Chichagóv was the first
other people.
rejected, the valuable ones really did all go into the two cases. Only
thirty thousand rubles a year and always occupy a prominent position in
I cannot find words to express to you my displeasure. You command only


“No, I don’t want that, I don’t want to see and understand that. I want
groom appointed to look after her. Pétya, who was laughing, whipped and
Balashëv to the quarters assigned him.

had never been to blame, might be held responsible at headquarters
room, and his valet was buttoning on to the back of his breeches a


still-green, thickly growing oats, and at other quite black fields just
avoid seeing the girl she ran toward the house.
confused when she saw Prince Andrew. He covered his face with his hands
“But why don’t you want to take it?” she asked again.
presence, and the women who were breathlessly longing to be asked to
of innumerable circumstances the Russians could not give battle till
said, it seemed might easily happen—she could not oppose Natásha. Though
husband.
same time at the Emperor Francis.
farther into the region where the army was already in action.
glass of lemonade and a spiral wax candle—moved close to the bed, and
they too could, like Natásha and Borís, escape from the drawing room.
mysterious reflection.

hanged,” said Prince Andrew with a smile. “So I am serving because

All that July the old prince was exceedingly active and even animated.
    CHAPTER XI
“Here is some scent. Perónskaya must be tired of waiting.”
Again he closed his eyes. His sobs ceased, he pointed to his eyes, and
and cheeks, and nearly all had red, swollen and festering eyes.
“He could not do that. The people only gave him power that he might
of blue cloth and wearing medals. In the noblemen’s hall there was
Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circle and
nothing but love and an entreaty for forgiveness.
round smiling face, taking a casket from a housemaid. “You know it has
Matrëna Matrévna and ask her for the sable cloak. I have heard what

to hang, were as little voluntary as the actions of any soldier who was

“No, no! I’ll do anything!” she said, suddenly checking her tears.

pleasant smile, as if it were obvious to him that his success must
the fourth was Nicholas’ own with a short shaggy black shaft horse.
through the night, he had crept by day into some bushes right among the
while we are here. And it had to happen that we should meet at that
deceitful German, whom he would not only kill with pleasure but whom

Rostóv, his eyes avoiding Denísov, began buttoning his coat, buckled



Fatherland. But this shall be our last separation. Believe me, directly

see that they had been observed. He was sorry for the pretty frightened
     innumerable churches shaped like Chinese pagodas.”
uncomprehended, and terrible, was becoming unbearable. Those standing
out of them.”
him. The pain in his arm became more and more intense. Irresistible
favorite, Natásha, on the cheek with her large hand.
indisposition was the strong impression made on his sensitive mind by
or to the place of execution his companions had pointed out to him as
number, ever increasing and increasing, exceeded what it had been in
CHAPTER III
he had met Rostóv, tried to enliven the conversation. One of the
at the Rostóvs’ he stayed till midnight. The Rostóvs’ footman rushed
turning mockingly to Ramballe.
felty winter hair.

the welfare of the charitable and educational institutions under her
Krémlin and in Posnyákov’s house were closed again at once because the



crowd made a rush for the doors, and several persons with excited faces
that I am saying!” thought a diplomatist, glancing at the happy faces

an Englishman is undoubtedly correct. An Italian is self-assured because
the reception room, where he found some ten officers and generals.

“Owing to the present state of things Sophia Danílovna has gone to the

of some three acres around. Crowds of men of various arms, wounded and


and endure. He did not again go to the sick man, nor turn to look at
1.F.
than in Russian but quite calmly.

“You can see the woman in her already,” she said in French, pointing to
smiling, glittered with effort and exasperation as he mustered his
Something cracked in the flames. The fire died down for a moment and
“I thought perhaps something had happened,” she said with her


Natásha and Princess Mary looked at one another in silence, and the
my riding and commanding so vast an army, so I have passed on the
of a man who enjoys life and knows how to live, he swayed to and
miserable wretches who had done much evil for which they had now to
of twenty; Sónya a girl of sixteen with all the charm of an opening
say something but could not. Her brother had guessed right: the little



of them, and they were thrown over the parapet and removed later on that

sunny morning and by eight o’clock it was already hot. “A good day for
sing. As soon as she began to laugh, or tried to sing by herself, tears
close by, when it yelped, tucked its tail between its legs, and darted
everyone came to take leave of him and they all wept.
“Which is the senior?” he asked, on seeing the prisoners.
why, the position of the Russian army being what it was at Krásnoe and
princess anxious and inquiring, the nurse encouraging. Everyone in the
he would have approved of is our family life. He was always so anxious
“One step beyond that boundary line which resembles the line dividing


One of these was running to cross the path of Count Rostopchín’s


turn now, but that he will do all he can to let his turn come as late as
“It’s not true!”
participation of Count Rostopchín and his broadsheets. The people

her shabbiest dress and an old mantilla, Natásha, shivering in the fresh
these conversations made the nations happy or unhappy. Suddenly the
from which occasional puffs were blown by an invisible smoker.
Prince Andrew and his sister, hand in hand, kissed one another, and
companies, crowds of whom set off to the neighboring villages, or
dear friend, listen! I know it all. I know I am not worthy of her, I

That evening he learned that all these prisoners (he, probably, among
evidently suffered a defeat at the old prince’s. She was still too
glances without coloring, but even the old countess and Natásha blushed

human wills, is continuous.

Prince Andrew nodded to him. He still looked ahead while Prince Andrew

soul: courage, generosity, morality, love of mankind, and especially
Shevárdino knoll, where he sat on his campstool, his sallow face
perfect one’s self. And to attain this end, we have the light called


for his last reconnoitering expedition, and was awaiting Denísov, who

the whole sting of her remark to lie in that word.
curlpapers, ran in. The countess—her prayerful mood dispelled—looked

even have considered such a very free and easy manner improper and in
CHAPTER IX
his dreams he still saw himself in the conditions of captivity. In the
in French out of all this, showing all the news we have had of the
others of that group stirred up so much trouble that Barclay, under
importance, he returned again, called back the cook and the club
pocket of his riding breeches, with his eyebrows lifted and his mouth

Borís said a few words to his general, and Count Bennigsen turned to
distrust in Bolkónski’s emphatic opinion yet not feeling able fully
noise, or display, that Rostóv could not believe his eyes and remained
thoughts he has dreamed of for nights, but looks around for help or a
service he risked his skin and his life twenty times a year, and in
French column, with its officers leading, appeared from below the hill.
readjusted his hat, and pulling himself together drew himself up and,

“Now they will stop it, now they will be horrified at what they have
it really happened, it would have been necessary to make an effort of

“It means that Anna Makárovna has finished her stocking,” said Countess
“Yes, yes, I am unhappy,” assented Pierre. “But what am I to
“Well, never mind; I only...”
police, after reporting that he had executed the instructions he had
surrounded them in superior numbers, when the disordered French, hungry
inquiring look. He was about to stoop over her hand and kiss it, but
“Ah, from Vienna? Very good. Later, later!”
After she had gone, a dressmaker from Madame Suppert-Roguet waited on
air and in silence, nodded with approval or shook his head dubiously,
admired his regiment, rejoiced in it, and that his whole mind was
“Oh, little countess!” ... and the count began bustling to get out
that more irritating news than yours could not have been conceived.
too, but it’s only now that I feel such love. It’s not the same as
illness of the old Georgian princess, of Métivier’s disappearance from
calling on the principal Austrian dignitaries. Between four and five

morning and had been in a fever of excitement and activity all day. All
afflicted by the death of the father he had hardly known), and her
tokens of base metal that have no value but merely jingle. As gold is
“Yes, they say it’s burned,” he said. “It’s a great pity,” and he gazed
a trap, while Nicholas rode with Natásha and Pétya to “Uncle’s”
“Bezúkhov.”
of Ostróvna. Still laughing and talking, the officers began hurriedly
Kochubéy said a few words about the reception Arakchéev had given
all that was necessary so as to get from under that ceiling, out into
figure cut by the new French ambassador.”
or if it were in any way unsuitable. But on the contrary, my papa and
follow Pierre. Pierre, taking him by the arm, pulled him toward himself
At dinner Pétya having returned home told them the news he had heard.
him!” he thought enviously.
the “heroes”) of the efficacy of the directions issued in wartime by

“But don’t be late, Count, if I may venture to ask; about ten

all this time in Pierre’s soul, revealing much to him and causing him
about discussing it. Besides the ordinary topics of conversation, Pierre
how she had gone to look for mushrooms the previous summer and had lost

words of prayer, and the sobbing of the count’s old valet.
upset when I told him people had come to ask what was the matter with
mine when I married and was so deep in debt that I was threatened with
something extraordinary was happening, and that is always exciting,
The third company was the last, and Kutúzov pondered, apparently trying

about it he had found that peace and inner harmony only through the
sergeant was carrying in a wooden bowl to an officer who sat on a log
would still remain piteous and plain. After two or three changes to

sound of footsteps.
rose, frowned, shrugged his shoulders, and evidently trying to appear
it and saw Telyánin’s horse at the porch.
I was punished once about some plums? You were all dancing, and I sat
against Napoleon.
shrine of the Mother of God and to Madame Suppert-Roguet, who was so
service at the palace church in honor of the Emperor’s birthday, Prince
for value received. And to avoid being imprisoned for the remainder, as
conquered everybody everywhere—that is, he killed many people because
too seemed strange; at one moment they looked impudently sly and at the

Rostóv thrust the purse under the pillow and shook the damp little hand

and there is nothing to thank me for. No one has ever complained yet of
“Ah, my dear vicomte,” put in Anna Pávlovna, “L’Urope” (for
the past with nothing but her charms which gave him delight, but for
and I’ll have you tried, and you’ll be hanged! Say from whom you had
entered his father’s dressing room (not with the contemptuous look and


“Know what?” Natásha’s eyes asked.
again. Probably it had never had an owner, and it still belonged to
Hardly had Rostóv handed him the letter and finished explaining
Meanwhile, Pétya, having found and seized the sabers in the outer room,
contented and happy with him. I only wish you were all as happy as I
past, suddenly cried out in joyful surprise:

to the Russians, as soon as that change occurred the need of attacking
intended to hunt seriously, he did not want to take Natásha and Pétya.
and in place of an intellect (grouping events and drawing conclusions)
well-known, so-called sophism of the ancients consisting in this, that
Magnítski’s words were again crowned by laughter. Stolýpin gave
haven’t spoken, but now you yourself have begun. I don’t trust him,

militia uniforms, wept for Russia and its ancient capital and talked of
“So you are glad and I have done right?”
even more beautiful than it had been three days before at the review. It

before, and on both sides, crowds of militiamen with bared heads walked,
Sónya was more tender and devoted to him than ever. It was as if she

insisted that battles, which were useless then, should not be fought,

had not yet gathered courage to enter the circle.
Sónya was softened, excited, and touched by all that had occurred that
continued. During this interval Pierre noticed that Prince Vasíli

Pierre, in reply, sincerely agreed with her as to Hélène’s


“You might have taken some from the covering troops.”
“Sónya, what is the matter with you? How can you?” said he, running
“Then how about our position?”
CHAPTER II

“Of course. I’m going into action! I’ve shaved, bwushed my teeth,
The soldiers, of whom there are the most, form the lower section of
which they apparently do not recognize.
with the flirtatiousness of a handsome youth at Sónya and the young
of the newly commissioned officer were collected. Anna Mikháylovna,
she must love him if she could so far forget herself! Perhaps I might
were surrounded by Cossacks who had hurried up. “We won’t take them!” he

They went into the little room where Borís slept. Rostóv, without
Andrew, told how Bonaparte wishing to test Markóv, our ambassador,
And she smiled her ecstatic smile.
     * Bridgehead.
advice to seek. Had my benefactor been here he would have told me what
Rostopchín’s broadsheets, headed by woodcuts of a drink shop, a potman,
executed because they could not be. Apart from that, the chief source
drawing room—that of love—boundless love for him, for her, and for all

design but undertook an expedition into Russia, with which country he
Rostóv smiled.

“What does he look for in me? He is trying to discover something by
that lay on the bank. At a mute sign from him, a telescope was handed
Rostóvs’ position and his own, he decided that the time had come to
noticed embarrassment and awkwardness on his part in her presence,
which made a certain sensation, the count exchanged glances with
   Living in a foreign land...
Frenchmen begin to drown one another cannot be understood without an
memory, and he told everybody that his son had been killed. He tried not
wide-open happy eyes, and quickly seizing his head pressed it to her
situation did not grow more serious but on the contrary became even
prisoners had been captured.

observed the faces of those around him.
Had Princess Mary been capable of reflection at that moment, she would

“Yes, I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace, and it is very
to his person, the little man in the gray overcoat got up and, having
read a congratulation on his future son-in-law and on his daughter’s
Yet in spite of that, his relation to her—considerate, delicate, and

kissed him at the same time. Only his mother was not there, he noticed
Bourienne, with her ribbon and pretty face, and her unusually animated
he remembered how his love had ended. “He did not need anything of that
servants. Márya Dmítrievna, with her spectacles hanging down on her
so on Evstáfey’s representation Pierre had to put off his departure till
in wine, and some in governmental affairs. “Nothing is trivial, and
together everyone kept silent. Sometimes the others would get up and

all those faces the same expression of consciousness of the solemnity
“The mummers from the count’s. I know by the horses,” replied some
on her bed, laughed at the pleasant thought that she would immediately
water, but Natásha did not respond to her.
the first place it is hard to understand where the profundity and genius
evidently did not realize what they were doing.
thoughts he expressed in conversation supposed his wishes to be. And she

The entire household was governed according to Pierre’s supposed orders,

was dulled by imbecility and a constant expression of sullen

Another hussar also rushed toward the horse, but Bondarénko had already
white, muscular flesh. The officer, Timókhin, with his red little nose,
gold, of carts and horses, kept rising, but the value of paper money and
On the thirty-first of December, New Year’s Eve, 1809 - 10 an old
audience with the Emperor Francis occupied his thoughts.
attack would be ruined by the absence of those two regiments, which
only had to shake himself, to be ready without a moment’s delay for some
the door, was sitting at the table in a Persian dressing gown, writing.
mamma are now provided for—I have arranged that rent for them in the
suite, with Pierre among them, set out on their ride along the line.
passion,” said the latter.
habitual to him. His face took on the stupid artificial smile (which

Petersburg society anxious and uneasy, a terrible piece of news was
maddened—even at those flèches themselves it was impossible to make out
the Emperor’s eyes, Michaud—quoique étranger, russe de cœur et d’âme,—at
The night was dark but starry, the road showed black in the snow that
foolish. And running over the events of the day he remembered the French
for nothing, and deep in his heart experienced a gloomy and stern
couple of feet by all the borzois, who did not get any closer to her.
to her and what she would say to him, and these words sometimes seemed
Though no words had passed between Anatole and Mademoiselle Bourienne,
yielded reluctantly. He was absorbed in the role he had created
Berg explained so clearly why he wanted to collect at his house a small
leather cushion and seeing nothing but that cushion, and her confused

with pleasure and he flushed and was breathless when Pierre spoke to

so truly discern the importance of the people’s view of the events that
smiled, and with dimples in her rosy cheeks followed him into the room.
There was something peculiar about it, quite unsoldierly, rather comic,
rhythmically. Without moving from where he stood he began speaking in
   It is for thee thus swells her heart,
Austerlitz and held a perfectly unnecessary sword in his left. He
with a scared look and that Princess Mary was no longer by the cot.

continued.
Before he had reached the embankments that were being thrown up, he saw,
Since the ball he had felt the approach of a fit of nervous depression
dissatisfaction on Borís’ face, and as always happens to those in a
of the meeting at Tilsit he asked the names of those who had come with
Petersburg to procure an appointment in the Guards for her only son.


They were silent awhile.

in his hat and black hair curling down to his shoulders. He wore a red
started these and Pierre was particularly agreeable and amusing about

upon anyone, and it was clear that the kitten had settled down only to
It was rumored that Savary had been sent to propose to Alexander
CHAPTER XII
No one answered.

and Charles I are executed by their people? To this question historians
“To attain this end we must secure a preponderance of virtue over vice

tormented by the consciousness of his own weakness. The few glasses of
Her voice sounded so serious and so sad that the chirping of the birds
Inside the shed Alpátych and the coachman arranged the tangled reins and
across the table to clink glasses with the count, with the children, and
“Natásha! Now it’s your turn. Sing me something,” they heard the
with him. There now, Sídorov!”
the same waistcoat and high white stock he had worn at the meeting of

is, the position on which the battle took place), but never till the
with three) and the music ceased. A worried aide-de-camp ran up to the
“And so you think Napoleon will manage to get an army across?” asked

heated horses, exchanging remarks and smiling, had stopped behind the
“What else did he say to you? What are those verses? Read them...”
her handsome eldest daughter were in the drawing room with the visitors
that it is we who lost the battle of Pultúsk. In short, we retreat
Reinstating the first condition omitted, that of time, we see that no
besides! But don’t let’s talk about me; tell me how you managed
CHAPTER XXII
could find a state in which he felt that though idle he was fulfilling
Natásha. He said this at a moment when she alone could hear him. “You
“Do you understand, damn you?” shouted a voice, and Pierre woke up.
an instance in history of the aim of an historical personage being so
CHAPTER XV
listened to the light click of the steel needles. “Can fate have brought

not to notice one another. When having limbered up the only two cannon

CHAPTER XV
    CHAPTER IV
appearance had nothing about it that would reveal to an Oriental mind
well.”
was, for something could be descried. On the right the Guards were
projections, and slipping between the legs of the generals she darted
speaking to an Austrian general. Prince Andrew, who was a little behind
Ten minutes later Lavrúshka brought the coffee. “He’s coming!”
Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

but, like Napoleon, did not take part in the actual fighting and only
the Rhetor, “is an emblem of something not cognizable by the senses
again in Vorónezh the impression she made on him was not merely pleasing
epaulettes had been packing with his valet in the rooms assigned to him.


The meeting was at an end, and on reaching home Pierre felt as if he had
everything was going well on the farm. Her unnatural tone made him wince
young, with a dimple in the chin and light-blue eyes—was not an enemy’s

bright green stood out sharply against the brownish strips of winter rye
Natásha raised her head and, kissing her friend on the lips, pressed
grayish color.
had entered and left the town with their bands playing, and by the Grand
it.... I like it. You shall be satisfied....”
CHAPTER XI
without knowing why, felt awkward about paying court to her. When they
Dólokhov.
that of the Cossack who wanted more booty than he got, and so on. But

undertaken something new. But after a four days’ halt the mob, with no
ask her what he had been saying, and be vexed if he noticed that she
of the heap, something indestructible, which though intangible is the
had immense consequences for him and for all his family.
In 1809 the intimacy between “the world’s two arbiters,” as

use of him and amused himself at his expense without letting the other
“Platónic love, clouds...” he muttered.
much to say to one another in private and so they had been seeking an
the rapidity of which was unparalleled for such a time of the year.
voice. “There was no one else in the room except myself. So that if it
you are not aware of the fact...”
countess and piloted the provincial Rostóvs in Petersburg high society,
Immediately after greeting the count he went up to Natásha and followed
for refusing the command of the army, yet blamed him for such excessive


midst of a most complex play of intrigues, worries, contingencies,
Bezúkhova’s visit and the invitation for that evening, Márya
in a frieze coat.
Prince Andrew.

thought. The minister drew the remaining papers together, arranged them
sound, like the yelp of a dog, with which Denísov turned away, walked to
country’s welfare? Well, what is it? Speak!” Denísov blushed like a

At the same time the commander of the artillery of the 1st Corps,
clenching his small hand and striking the table with it, “and what
on his cheek, in shirt sleeves, really did jump out of a window on the
won’t go.”

At that moment the first smith got up and, scratching his bruised
that he had composed in his imagination could he now recall. Those

its chief promoter, began to interest him so keenly that the question
One would have thought it impossible for a man to stretch himself
pleasant impression on his mind, in her own home.

knitting a striped scarf for him.
Though tattered, hungry, worn out, and reduced to a third of their

    CHAPTER XV

“The highest wisdom is not founded on reason alone, not on those
“Ah, my dear friend, he is very unfortunate,” she said. “If what
and behind the outposts and told him that his wish to be presented to
things. To her other defects (as most people thought them, but which
“Is it certain?” she said.
distance that allowed every softly spoken word to be heard, followed
of several thousand men could produce. The lights spread farther and
Moscow, and now allowed Madame Aubert-Chalmé (the center of the whole

good old days. Denísov, flushed after the mazurka and mopping himself
begged him to begin. Everyone became silent.
attentively all that went on around him and to note it down. At the time
“There, look at that,” said Karatáev, swaying his head. “People said
of Providence in this meeting of the princess and Nicholas.
fire, and the frosts—and instead of genius, stupidity and immeasurable
said: even if he had to go on dying, to die continually before my eyes,
me.”
Natásha did. She could not see people unconcernedly, but had to send
“He should pay folks off properly,” a thin workingman, with frowning
know,” muttered the old man, and after looking Natásha over from head


in any case. He has forwarded me a letter from Borís. Thank God, Borís
with no one interested in them and not wanted by anyone. Prince Andrew
sound as of a frightful explosion struck his ear, and at the same moment
that afternoon. She felt that as she brought with her the person the


“I knew the princess at once,” put in Mademoiselle Bourienne.
forbade Father Augustin to remove icons or the relics of saints; now
they brought him news that Murat had been taken prisoner, and the staff
smilingly inclining his head.
little man with one arm, who was walking about the first room in a

death, all at once rose before her with a new, previously unknown force
the service and patriotically Russian. He resented Shinshín’s remark.

The captain, on the other hand, seemed very cheerful. He paced up and
least. Its furry tail stood up firm and round as a plume, its bandy legs
attack instead of being attacked, and so render the whole of this
went into the drawing room. Two letters brought by a courier were handed
and began to cry.
seminarists, and gentry were mingled, had gone early that morning to
told him: “I made you King that you should reign in my way, but not in
escape as quickly as possible from this position, of the hopelessness of
colors, who were shouting something in shrill voices.

could find nothing to reproach them with; but even they had their
thought) their exalted feelings by words; but this silence about him had

between two rows of birch trees.
“I won’t, I can’t sleep, what’s the use? Come now for the last


cheerful were the troops. The greatest disorder and depression had been

two candles. On the table was a pile of gold and paper money, and he
squadron may be recommended for honors and he may get a ribbon. Our
“But what did you want?” cried Márya Dmítrievna, growing angry again.
inhabitants left against his wishes. If the government offices were
she went on: “Nowadays everyone finds fault. A Gospel Society! Well, and
and a silver ruble were fetched and they all played games together.
And in fact Toll, to whom he went to communicate the news, immediately
“Let me kiss you, dear old fellow! Oh, how fine, how splendid!”


“It is unavoidable,” said Prince Andrew with a sigh.

came the deep tones of the wolf call from Daniel’s hunting horn; the
ventured to draw the Emperor’s attention to the devotion of the Poles
“If he is an honorable man he should either declare his intentions or
“Ah, those damned Germans! They don’t know their own country!”

attention as it passed the front porch. With the help of a maid she was
pleasant smell. I have the honor to be one of your wife’s adorers. Is
“Can you resist it?” those eyes seemed to be asking.
served there as you do. I remember you at Austerlitz.... I remember,
“That’ll do, that’ll do—nonsense....”
was a weary and famished, but still a fighting and menacing army. But
“I don’t myself know ‘to who,’” replied the cornet in a
“Nothing... only I feel sad... sad about Andrew,” she said, wiping
The day after Rostóv had been to see Borís, a review was held of the
The irregulars destroyed the great army piecemeal. They gathered the

others an enemy in regard to Anatole? As for Pierre, he evidently did
Denísov, frowning, took the envelope and opened it.
and noticing nothing around him went on moving his legs as the others
pay came every four months, there was nothing to think out or decide,

peace, he said: There can be no peace, for such is the people’s will. He
Pierre and much better dressed than he. They looked at him and at his


was saying, but he knew (the categories of thoughts were also quite
it was only a personal struggle between “Granddad” and “Long-coat” as
he would make the countess his mother happy, would be able to put his

to be always surrounded by gentlemen-in-waiting) that he, Count Rostóv,
and they handed her a fur cloak. She threw this over her head and
one of them knew, not one of them wanted to know, and not one of them
who have striven to attain this mystery, and thereby to render them
of millions in Russia for the humiliation of England. But these
sent an order for him to report at headquarters.

He alone—with his ideal of glory and grandeur developed in Italy and
of slime that covered her soul and seemed to her impenetrable, delicate
cast in the false mold of a European hero—the supposed ruler of men—that
thought Pierre, “and how little attention we pay to it!”
turned away and went down the side of the corridor.
“What does that woman want?” asked the officer.
clerk. “The Kiev Grenadiers, Podolian...”
“We should ask him... that’s he himself?”... “Yes, ask him indeed!...
from that room and taking Natásha by the arm said something to her.
kept turning his horse in front of the squadron.
him. But she also loved Anatole, of that there was no doubt. “Else how
which several others joined but which bored Pierre. When the music began
“No, I am used to this,” said Pétya. “I say, aren’t the flints in your
rode toward Balashëv at a gallop, his plumes flowing and his gems and

CHAPTER XII
coughed, swallowed, and said in French that she was very pleased to see
before going down she went into the room where the icons hung and, her
his reputation fighting them.”
with all of whom he was acquainted. He too approached that group and
spread out his arms with a choleric gesture.

Pierre looked at Rostopchín with naïve astonishment, not understanding

“That’s so, your excellency, all they have to do is to eat a good
Natásha.
States.
or other Moscow revelers’, drank whole nights through, outvying
“Well, you see, my dear princess and cousin, Catherine Semënovna,”
plaintive moan of reproach was drowned by the threatening and angry roar
all connected, while now they had all tumbled to pieces. Only senseless
trot to escape from the poisoned atmosphere of these latrines.
Borís smiled, as if he understood what Prince Andrew was alluding to
sitting beside the soldier, wagging its tail.
“Very good,” answered Nesvítski.
and my life, my life,” he thought, “must be risked?”
best and happiest moments of his life—especially his earliest childhood,
Borís with a smile.

breast and said, “Let us commit ourselves and our whole lives to Christ
door and took the boy back to the nursery. Five minutes later little
traditions and customs, and (3) that during their military movement they
Next day the prince did not say a word to his daughter, but she noticed
Pierre.
hopeful by the expression he read on the faces there, he smiled sadly
In the middle of this fresh tale Pierre was summoned to the commander in

One day in midwinter when sitting in the schoolroom attending to her
very, very nice. Only not quite my taste—he is so narrow, like the
herself suggested that he should go to Petersburg, though she would feel
sitting on them. Some were walking about the rooms in hospital dressing


“Well, how are you? Still getting stouter?” he said with animation, but
Why not? He’ll explain”... voices in the rear of the crowd were
brother, kissed him, and unable to restrain her tears any longer began
Before the countess could answer, Prince Andrew entered the room with
Natásha, she was seized by a joyful and superstitious feeling that God
cloud, and the cupolas and crosses, the hoarfrost, the distance and the
entrance, after scrutinizing the mother and son (who without asking to
he had visited the night before with Dólokhov. The French were making
apparition and began speaking about the prince’s indisposition.
ears and looking to the left and then to the right and listening to the

“You used to want to, and now you don’t. Really I don’t understand you,
dinner all who came “to congratulate.” The countess wished to have
who made her a low bow when she met him in the corridor carrying hot
The faces of officers and men brightened up at the sound. Everyone got
Moscow would soon be in the enemy’s hands, just as Count Rostopchín
said the general, turning to an artillery officer. “Have a little fun
explained Prince Andrew. “The others, one’s neighbors, le prochain,
hollow and were firing at our men. Prince Bagratión bowed his head as a
downhill and uphill, across a ryefield trodden and beaten down as if by
putting them down. When they’ve been put down, the war with Buonaparte
knew what had happened to him as he knew it himself.
and some lint each month or we should be lost!” he laughed. “Four
backwards down from the oven, her bare little feet catching at its
time. He no longer seemed stout, though he still had the appearance of
kissing her hand, he left the room with quick resolute strides, without
Ermólov. “It was a trick. It was done on purpose to get Konovnítsyn into
approached Kutúzov. Of Kutúzov’s suite only four remained. They were
served on one of the committees.) Returned home for dinner and dined
Natásha smiled and was on the point of speaking.

French but all Europe—except England which does not take part in the

asked him.
Berlin, Vienna, and other towns, simply because its inhabitants



the order to start. The sick soldier, Sokolóv, pale and thin with dark
Arakchéev, uttering only the first words amiably and then—again


to blame. All that he had been specially put in charge of, the state
“Some herb vodka? Certainly!” said Túshin. “But still, to
Pierre did not allow himself to reflect on what lay before him, but
peasant sees the devil in the locomotive; others as a force resulting
“wasn’t I telling you to fire the bridge, when inflammable material
“He always was rather harsh; and now I should think he’s getting
Sónya wiped away her tears and went up to Natásha, again scanning her

be brought before Napoleon himself. But instead of that, at the next
loudly, handing Kutúzov an envelope.
“Well, is ev’wything weady?” asked Denísov. “Bwing the horses.”
Natásha. It was a letter from Princess Mary.

individuals, and should have been induced to do so by an infinite number
The cannonade on the left flank will begin as soon as the guns of the
him and he was at once blindfolded again.
Pierre’s side near Kutúzov and in a most natural manner, without

Rostóvs were hunting and let his man snatch a fox their dogs had

me; but, my dear, I am getting on for sixty and must be prepared for
The actors of 1812 have long since left the stage, their personal
alone with the old man he will talk things over and then come on to
and sat down again smilingly beside “Uncle,” begging him to play
his dressing gown and smiled slightly, as if expressing respectful
“Not at all,” rejoined the adjutant in dismay. “Klyucharëv had his own
relying on reason only? What art thou? You are young, you are rich, you
herself experienced, but they all seemed attentive to what was happening
life of the peoples.
perplexity.
She was sitting by her sister at the tea table, and reluctantly, without

used to like to spend them, or to open his mind by intimate talks with
hussars, flushing and addressing an adjutant who had ridden up, “so
illuminated by the candles burning before it and by the morning light
girls white gauze over pink silk slips, with roses on their bodices and
with the family, he had gone on with his regiment which was making for
my advice,” she began. “Yesterday, as you know, I went to see Prince
was not because of Napoleon’s commands that they killed their fellow

orders he had received, the whole French army having, in its convulsive
too, might have their own interests. But all he said was so prettily
as if at times there radiated from them shafts of warm light)—were
“I can’t make out at all,” said Nesvítski.
over the battlefield had given final orders to strengthen the batteries
comes from that! Even then I felt it,” he thought. “I felt then that
moved and halted at the officers’ command, turned with banners flying,
opinion of the specialist historian, tries to prove that the campaign of
as presents now became the most exacting of the creditors. Nicholas was
The members of what had once been an army—Napoleon himself and all his
M. de Beausset, the man so fond of travel, having fasted since morning,
“I think she’s asleep, Mamma,” said Sónya softly.
“When speaking to the Emperor, try as far as you can to praise the way
granted.
as we are masters of Ulm, we cannot be deprived of the advantage of
Formerly he had feared the end. He had twice experienced that terribly
he alone knew how to utter.
that fat one in spectacles” (that was how Pétya described his
Vasíli, it is very sad for both. Ah, my dear friend, our divine
is dressed! Lovely! And that stout one in spectacles is the universal
to walk up and down before it.
of the service the voices of the priests suddenly ceased, they whispered
was going on, she called Sónya to her and, instead of reproaching and
the young countess?” he asked. “Where is she?”
evidently should not have been.
“Yes, yes,” said she, “but you have no reason to regret the past, Count.

thousand, that’s war! But the enemy has lost masses....
came at the right time. Tout vient à point à celui qui sait attendre. *
Rostopchín, who is usually represented as being the instigator of that
an opportunity of effacing it. Having heard that Count Mamónov was
unless a prompt remedy is applied the troops will no longer be under
Yes? Mamma, are you asleep?”


by so doing caused the old countess to weep tears of joy. After that,
“When I tell you that I must talk to you!...” repeated Pierre.
fallen leaves that dropped of themselves from that withered tree—the

day before and that they had sent for the doctor, but that she was
much heat, and, as it seemed to Pierre, gave orders of great military

The blood rushed to Pétya’s face and he grasped his pistol.


“O Lord, O Lord!” exclaimed the count. “Where is the manifesto?”
“Why, the position of assistants. The society need not be secret if the
families of the Rostóvs’ and Bolkónskis’ relations sometimes came to
before, were now visible in the distance. And farther still, beyond

indicate a wish to get rid of him, and therefore Prince Vasíli’s opinion

Meanwhile, Mávra Kuzmínichna was attentively and sympathetically
flung it on the ground.
to the visitor she added: “She is my youngest girl.”
joyful and solemn was aroused among the soldiers of the convoy and the


Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing long before his

incomprehensible. And yet more incomprehensible is the cessation of that
yells and swayed about him, Rostopchín suddenly turned pale and, instead
“We heard so,” replied the man.
that moment been wounded and his face showed fear rather than suffering.
The count moved in his affairs as in a huge net, trying not to believe
Modern history has rejected the beliefs of the ancients without


Pierre was ungainly. Stout, about the average height, broad, with huge
all commanders of divisions the right to shoot marauders, but I much
him the victory at Austerlitz; and by chance all men, not only the
that Karatáev had been killed, but just at that instant, he knew not
be brought here well wrapped up in felt. I must have two hundred pots
boy ran after them angrily, as if vexed that their program had been

which changed his appearance for the worse. There was something naïvely
till tears started to his eyes.
toward Rostóv, she paused.
Tsar and the country? It is wartime. Such a fine fellow must serve.

occasioned by the sausage eaters.
passed out by a back door, but returned to their places one after the
is in her heart? All that is good. But how? What is her mind like? What
account. And during the two days of the young man’s visit he was
to describe the horrors and sufferings he had witnessed he was
porch took out a clean pocket handkerchief and tied a knot in it.
captain, his nose growing redder as he gave a smile which showed where
anyone. Anatole went up to him and began speaking to him, looking at and
Soon after Prince Bagratión had left him, Túshin had succeeded in
And try as Kutúzov might to restrain the troops, our men attacked,
and shudders of a mortally wounded animal. Very often a wounded animal,
“Be a man, my friend. I will look after your interests,” said she in
musketeer...” he sang, pretending to hiccough after each syllable.
to the Karágins’ with the firm intention of proposing. Julie met
Kutúzov like all old people did not sleep much at night. He often fell
speaks of Lily, but I say, no—the princess! Do you want me to do it? I
drawn from history. It is merely necessary to select some larger or


hand at the salute and resuming the game of adjutant and general for

his words which would explain his feeling for her.
“Listen to me, Prince,” said she. “I have never yet asked you
to be excused some work; why he, that kind Nicholas, should obstinately
“With you I will be quite frank,” said Anna Mikháylovna. “There
Powdered footmen, in livery with buckled shoes and smart stockings,
On the Poklónny Hill, four miles from the Dorogomílov gate of Moscow,
those women—mostly mothers—who, having once made up their minds,

some kind of work and again played an active part in life. He did not
in to the utmost, their red necks squeezed into their stiff collars, and
the lowest ranks to the man at the top, who takes the least direct share

The goal is reached. After the final war of 1815 Alexander possesses all

Russians moved his army across the Kolochá. And the Russians, not having
and carefully placed her in an easy chair.
luggage. Franz, Bilíbin’s man, was dragging a portmanteau with some
beggar’s sack!”
do not write history), and (2) that spiritual activity, enlightenment,
door, and added in a whisper so that her son should not hear, “Wish me
we may make to ourselves the connection between the man and the external

This view was very general in the upper army circles and found support
strength of an army depends on its spirit. To lead men forward under
returned, Count Orlóv-Denísov, excited both by the abandoned attempt and
“Would you believe it, Count, I was not at all alarmed, because I knew
“Yes, yes, that is so,” said Pierre joyfully.
purchaser has turned up for the Moscow estate and for the house. If you
words of justice and mercy.... It is just this which Alexander will
the battle of Austerlitz began said that it would be lost, he alone, in

“Do you love me?”
thirty-five feet long and seven feet high, moved forward along the

“Thank God, there is no more of that!” he thought, covering up his head
that by resigning himself now to the force of circumstances and to those

Soldiers! This is the battle you have so longed for. Victory depends on
Pierre.
necessity of submitting, for a time, to this new order of things which

without his parents’ knowledge.
reading. Then Milorádovich looked round significantly at the other
Anísya Fëdorovna, with her light step, willingly went to fulfill her
there were other hours he had to spend somehow, and the habits and
marching kit, and on his cold face appeared that same it which Pierre
“Prince, I did not ask you here. Go, please go!” And he jumped up
regiments and two squadrons of hussars. Denísov, as was his wont, rode
He sat down facing Pierre. “By the way, you know German, then?”
letting the wounded have another and yet another cart.
The day after this conversation Natásha put on the old dress which
girls of about ten and twelve, dressed in dirty short frocks and cloaks,
Apráksins’ I heard a lady asking, ‘Is that the famous Prince
“Well, of course, of course! Let me have some more strips of linen.”
agitating conversation, and added: “I sent for you to keep you with me.”
Prince Andrew arrived at Tsárevo-Zaymíshche on the very day and at the
he must ride there.
him to await him there and rode on at a quick trot along the road to the
and in quite another position.
Napoleon and Alexander, but we shall be unable to consider them to
“If he is accused of circulating Napoleon’s proclamation it is not
Nicholas might come in to say good night.
The Guards had gone to the front; Dólokhov had been reduced to the
necessary to take some part in it.
That same day a council of war had been held in which all the members of

March, April, May. Speak, Mamma, why don’t you say anything? Speak!”
appointments, passing the autumn and spring in the fields on his bay

strength of soul and mind called genius. This power cannot be based on
Napoleon’s army of one hundred and fifty thousand men would cut him
frost-bound stillness, the troykas began to speed along the road, one
wolf which, softly swaying from side to side, was coming at a quiet
before. “One only wonders at the long-suffering or blindness of the
“Listen to me, Count, you have managed matters so that we are getting




is nice. He is very nice, and I love him like a son. But what then?...

mustache.
Only to the old countess at night in bed could Natásha have told all
inhabitants of Moscow wished to be armed, weapons were ready for them
long time talking of their happiness. They talked of how they would live

when the princess, as if lost in a fog, had already staggered out of the

penny on drink, and a drunken man to smash mirrors or glasses for no
a distant past. Then he recounted an episode in which the husband played
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU
accomplished much for the welfare of mankind.”
The huge, endless bivouac that had previously resounded with the
pointing to the empty sleeve of his dressing gown. “Looking for
conflicting and intersecting intrigues that eddied about the Emperor’s
shameless, and he ignores her!”
    CHAPTER II
the age.
Natásha stopped him.


Nicholas straight in the eyes, “you know the saying, ‘Lucky in love,
On returning to France, to the bosom of the great, strong, magnificent,
awoke and found in my mind the text from the Gospel: “The life was

down before the altar to which she was led. The enchanting, middle-aged
Márya Dmítrievna.

    CHAPTER XVII


State Councilor—and not merely these but a whole state constitution,
of each.
to prove anything to him. When Count Rostopchín at the Yaúza bridge

who had come into the room unnoticed by anyone, stood there and wiped
a desperate cry and such mad, drunken determination that, taken by

Nicholas expressed his disapproval of the postponement of the marriage
perseverance, but only the knowledge of how to get on with those who can
men and provisions have not arrived. Gallop off to him at once and
he had to speak to the Marshal, was driving up the avenue in the grounds
“Oh, you Don Juan! You serpent!” cried several voices.
Both were silent. There were two Germans and a Russian officer in the
     him for the password.... I am asking you if the colonel is


But at the instant he died, Prince Andrew remembered that he was asleep,
humanity.
yourself.”

“Lieutenant, he has a dagger,” were the first words Pierre understood.
The discussion began. Bennigsen did not yet consider his game lost.
wrapped up in his fur coat, he looked like a child taken out for an
Count Bezúkhov he did not let go his hold of the lad. He had the air of
right of the road.
shadows, without perspective, without distinction of outline. All life
established intimacy with the French marshals, and so dazzled by the
“But they’ll make grand leg bands, dear friend,” he said, and went back
the country was richest.
departure next morning, she went to her room and remained alone with her
At that moment, on the road from the town on which signalers had been
Rostopchín angrily.
amusing, or caressing women and children. There were many such men both
NAPOLEON
what I have seen. The troops are in complete disorder....”

into the forest. Then I see he’s no good and think I’ll go and fetch a

home now for the first time after eighteen months again brightened his
Anna Pávlovna’s soiree. The matter was mentioned to the Emperor, an

they looked at her careworn, despairing face, felt sure she would fall

When on saying good-by he took her thin, slender hand, he could not help
forms of pleasure—balls, promenades, concerts, and theaters—but she

who had been moving slowly, shouted, “Stop!” calling in the hounds,

waited. “Here it comes... this one is coming our way again!” he thought,
you; nobody could be! Had you not been there then, and now too, I don’t
Undoubtedly some relation exists between all who live contemporaneously,
and he felt ashamed of himself. Then he vividly pictured to himself

sorting the deceased’s books and papers, only in search of rest from
edge, but never losing sight of the moving French. That morning,

     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the

his eyes to Bolkónski with his customary smile and looked at him in

Pierre realized what contempt and animosity they all felt for the

how handsome they both are!”
perhaps I may...”
in the action and directs his activity chiefly to commanding.
in one minute,” said the resolute Dunyásha taking a needle that was

Andrew a reliable correspondent to whom he could pour out the bile he

“To be sure, we all have to die. I’m not against the commune,” said
inevitably have to learn what lies the other side of death. But you are
with the same vague irony Prince Andrew had noticed in the Minister of
that made him wonder whether he really ought not to stay and which he
consciousness of man’s will in the present moves in space, time, and
nearer to the window. She was evidently leaning right out, for the
“And I remember their telling me that you had been born under a
delight, now bask in the sun with a thoughtful air of importance, and

“Well, the Lord have mercy on us!” said the count, half in jest,
Sónya passed to the pantry with a glass in her hand. Natásha glanced

“Eh? Yes, I heard something: he said something awkward in His
operations according to him were connected with such complicated

On the eve of his departure from Petersburg Prince Andrew brought with
mornings, and that day she returned to the old way of life which she had
inhaled the frosty air with a full breast and, looking at the ground
to pay seven rubles a cartload to Dorogobúzh and I tell them they’re
doctor and expecting another for whom they had sent to town, they had
bequeathed his great deeds to posterity. But in Europe a reaction
on which he lay. I made the sign of the Knights of the East and of
sacrificed everything for his sake!” she cried. “It’s splendid!
“Hit him with an ax, eh!... Crushed?... Traitor, he sold Christ....

movement of peoples, and in no case can one admit that intellectual
gut Morgen!” * he said winking with a merry smile, evidently pleased
“I’ll stay here,” muttered Natásha. “Do lie down,” she added crossly,
instead of black. The regimental commander walked with his jerky steps
and had disinfected by steam) was on his way with the old man to buy the

eyes. “Call Andrew!” he said suddenly, and a childish, timid expression
duties, (c) relations with my friends, and the management of my affairs.

Pierre, as in a dream, saw several men standing before him, wearing

itself. But the idea that he, L’russe Besuhof, was destined to set a

and by what right he allowed himself to claim quarters that were already
accustomed when going into action to think about anything but what would
daughter’s absence, knocked at the door.
Michael Ivánovich rose and went to the study. But as soon as he had left
innumerable combinations of the maladies of those organs. This simple
but I have killed her, killed... She won’t get over it! She won’t
by. The shouting in the tavern had died down; only the moaning of the
dear, there’s friendship for you,” he repeated. “He’s joining
attracted by social activity and puffed up by pride. On this ground

ungainly Russian princesses, would fall in love with her and carry her
be decided very shortly.
army was flying from Russia with all possible speed, that is to say, was
daughter, but for a minister! For me, there are no ministers!”
probably come to Tilsit to see the Emperor.
serious and weighty matter, and the fact that A had been appointed


us. To the left the horizon bounded by the adjacent wood. Prince
the Moroséyka, the Lubyánka, and Pokróvka Streets. Others quartered

is natural that these and a countless and infinite quantity of other
gate?” thought he. Just then Mávra Kuzmínichna appeared from behind
arms, or the prosperity of the Petersburg and other universities, or the
This very sentence about Countess Zúbova and this same laugh Prince
to be an insignificant chip fallen among the wheels of a machine whose
that there were precedents (there were up to that time very few, but
“It’s not nonsense, Papa. Fédya Obolénski is younger than I, and he’s

life; and so despite his reluctance to remain in Moscow among people who

which it had been decided not to move but to wait. Yet there was no


galloped full speed back again. The infantry moved in the same way,

“About Borís... I know,” she said seriously; “that’s what I
longer there, since she was no more.
All that we know of the external world of nature is only a certain
feet and be laid low by our hosts! Lord, Thou art able to save both
the front of his squadron, and before he had time to finish giving the

“But still this does not mean that the campaign is over,” said



But those glances expressed something more: they said that she had

agitated him and evoked his sympathy. In men Rostóv could not bear to
impossible to go back to the same conversation, to talk of trifles is
Carts piled high with household utensils, chairs, and cupboards kept
“Uncle” sang as peasants sing, with full and naïve conviction that
catching at a biscuit; the old woman did not consider herself defeated
that she loves him! She probably opened the letter without knowing who
hand, “so this is how we meet again. He spoke of you even at the very

him, as if she were trying to find in his face the answer to some

circumstances as those I am in now, my action appears to me undoubtedly
bright home, his fluffy fur coat, his quickly gliding sleigh, his
a complicated interplay of interests, arguments, and passions at
Rostóv entered the soldiers’ ward. The foul air, to which he had


been happy, weariness of life overcame him with its former intensity,
a pleasant smile, bowed respectfully. In spite of her exceptional
prisoners and the French soldiers, in which Pierre had succeeded in

a heavenly feeling. Borís was telling his new friend Pierre who the
back to his dugout in a state such as Rostóv had never yet seen him in.
of Sónya, of the governess, and of every woman, pretty or plain—were
faces, that feeling was intensified. Throughout his journey he felt like
impulse.
wounded man.
another, they all gave, and transmitted, orders as to how to proceed,
“Now you, young prince, what’s your name?” said Prince Bolkónski,
    CHAPTER IV

but were (in his opinion) men he had brought there, feels que c’est
To study the laws of history we must completely change the subject of

ready to embrace something, were rounded, his pleasant smile and his
criterion of life.
“I think that before discussing these questions,” Pierre continued, “we
he now, sleeping on the bare damp earth with one side growing chilled
No one gave any reply.

relations with Mademoiselle Bourienne. His looks and cold tone to his
his fingers into his belt and smiling a little, walked to the front.
petisenfans, allay cushay dormir!” he exclaimed, imitating his Russian
With a pale and frowning face Dron stepped out of the crowd.



division would have been needed to convoy the corps of prisoners, and
back her head, this woman (who was “Uncle’s” housekeeper) trod
the upper floor of this big house and am experiencing a happy feeling of

They again took him by the shoulders and laid him on the stretcher.
impossible to pass any judgment.
their conqueror with love. I will tell the deputation that I did not,
I am unable to follow in that gentleman’s footsteps. If you wish to be
When he came level with the Foot Guards he noticed that about them and
leading to the stalls on the side nearest the Rostóvs’ box creaked,
Barclay de Tolly to report on the progress of affairs on the left flank.
so highly were still more so. Not only could he no longer think the

question is dealt with, that for history this question does not refer
a different thing. I know no one kinder, more generous, or better than

He’s naked, but yet he’s given it back.”
tortured each other either because Napoleon was ambitious or Alexander
going too. Besides, all the same I can’t study now when...” Pétya
    CHAPTER XX
impetus, and Princess Mary long remembered the dying creak of that
more natural and animated than usual, so that the wrinkles round
in face of her sorrow. Without any need of self-restraint, no wish to
pushing him at all.
herself out of this silence she ran to the servants’ quarters to meet
“Yes, I’ll go. I shall certainly go,” said Natásha decisively.
room. Denísov silently watched Lavrúshka’s movements, and when the

“I don’t want to,” answered Anatole continuing to smile.
of fear for his young and happy life, possessed his whole being. Rapidly
behindhand. She was still sitting before a looking-glass with a dressing

this thought to no one but to her confessor, Father Akínfi, the monk,


The landowner to whom Nicholas went was a bachelor, an old cavalryman, a
would be too extraordinary,” and at the very moment she thought this,

he meant to relate to his comrades. What had really taken place he did
leg crossed over the other and stroking his left hand with the slender
“Oh, I’ll go across and have a look....”
has only to observe that hive to realize that there is no longer any
occupies the place?” asked Prince Andrew.
apple, also half smiling as he looked at the handsome girl.
keeper, Vereshchágin. Perhaps you have heard of that affair with the
“Yes, I was brought up quite differently,” remarked the handsome
heard those days. Natásha watched him with an intent gaze that confused
“No, merci, mon père.”

submitted herself to Mademoiselle Bourienne and Lise. Both these women
kidnap.... Don’t you understand that it is as mean as beating an old man
Napoleon sat on a campstool, wrapped in thought.


arisen in all ranks—the force of circumstances compelled it to retire

see how these nestlings are growing up,” and she pointed to the girls.


men of his squadron who, unknown to him, had appropriated five barrels
you come to love...” said Prince Andrew with an unnatural smile.
and his one division, and even then Mortier slips through your fingers!
sometimes laughed. She hardly ever left the house and of those who came

a peculiarly threatening character to everything, amid this vortex of
Madeira”... “Hungarian”... or “Rhine wine” as the case might
group at the height of the guerrilla enthusiasm. Since early morning he

begin the engagement.

Her brother Pétya was upstairs too; with the man in attendance on him
people.
then, after I met her under such circumstances—so strangely, the idea
“Do you take vodka, Count?” asked Princess Mary, and those words
matters very satisfactorily. Borís, during the campaign, had made the

“For me? For me?... Trying for me!...” said she.
who had gathered round Rostóv—a fresh arrival from the world

On his return from his furlough Nicholas, having been joyfully welcomed
respectfully bowed head, seemed also to be waiting. The silence lasted

Hollabrünn and have pursued ever since to this place. The position we
French did not harm them. Alpátych also knew that on the previous day
with you. I can’t.”
On the other hand, even if we admitted that words could be the cause
as the only remaining choice was between losing the army as well as
“Aye, when I look at you!...” said one of them to Karp.

just above his ear.

Márina and drowned some eighteen thousand in one day.”
and crossed the room with him, unconsciously clearing a path seven
of that young soldier with eyes rolled back.
awaiting his Serene Highness, as everyone now called Kutúzov. From the
French quartermasters who had been sent on in advance.

Natásha blushed scarlet when she heard this.

and she won’t say anything to Mamma. Nicholas will tell her himself,
shirt, and in every knapsack the appointed number of articles, “awl,
side and at first did not play. Dólokhov kept glancing at him.
to be quite alien to her when they met. Just then Julie, who by the
rewarded and Denísov punished and unpardoned. He caught himself
I have a presentiment that for the first time I shall have to show all
with which everybody involuntarily addressed that officer.
Cards and supper were over, but the visitors had not yet dispersed.
her mother and went out.
feeling is for me stronger and higher than all else.”
“I will tell him, I will tell him everything once more,” said Pierre.
at all like the conduct of a great man!”
right!” And his head once more sank to his horse’s neck. All at once
Anna Pávlovna remarked with a melancholy smile that Kutúzov had done
are no words worthy to do it justice! I tell you, Papa” (he smote

voices at once began answering the interpreter. A French officer,
to Toll, Paulucci suggested an advance and an attack, which, he urged,
hesitation and uncertainty among his conductors. He heard those around
Shortly after nine o’clock that evening, Weyrother drove with his
“I bet a hundred on Stevens!” shouted one.
looked with vague horror and curiosity at these released lunatics and
who also enjoyed the famous actress’ favors, and that in his presence
creaks or makes more noise than it should, and hastens to check the

And these simple words, her look, and the expression on her face which


“I love you,” said Prince Andrew.
Hills, she took a special fancy to Mademoiselle Bourienne, spent whole
extermination of the French. Dórokhov’s report about Broussier’s
so, but you have no sense about women. What an argumentative fellow you
sighed, and her deep eyes expressed a quiet sadness as though she
flesh with their hands. There was something horrible and bestial in
As they were going round the Súkharev water tower Natásha, who was
impossible not to see that there could be no such direct cause of the
holding his nose as he ran past the men at work.
Napoleon walked about in front of his tent, looked at the fires and
everyone else, and was at all the balls and parties of the best society.

shaking him.
Soon after Prince Andrew’s return the old prince made over to him a
explain to us what without its help man cannot comprehend: why, for what
would again promise that this should really be the very last time.

The visitor was Bítski, who served on various committees, frequented
They’re fighting.”
stooped carefully with a supple and exact movement, picked up the ball,
that column himself. When he had reached the village of Pratzen he
dropping into his usual after-dinner nap, and laughed at everything.
Fleeing from Moscow the soldiers took with them everything they had
    CHAPTER VIII
nights,” replied the doctor, and he sat down morosely beside his wife,


“Nobody wants me!” thought Rostóv. “There is no one to help me or
The traveler was Joseph Alexéevich Bazdéev, as Pierre saw from the
Posen, Thorn, Danzig, and Königsberg. At each of these towns thousands

“Do help me out, Theodore Iványch, sir,” or “your excellency,”
and tormented me,” said he to himself, passing in review the principal
pursued Anatole.
preservation of my father’s house in Moscow, or the glory of the Russian
dinner and at other times, when as if tired of everyday life he had felt
nurse and nurse Sávishna in the late princess’ rooms and Princess
himself for his weakness, and raising his head addressed Michaud in a
re-erect against you that barrier which it was criminal and blind of
The officer, mounting his horse, rode off to someone else.
and hid it under his waistcoat.
evidently listening to herself with pleasure, and speaking with
The first Russians to enter Moscow were the Cossacks of Wintzingerode’s
the countess, your wife, is preparing to go abroad. I expect it’s

    CHAPTER I
sad and depressed. It was all so strange, so unlike what he had hoped.
hussars hastily dismounted, not knowing what they were to do. The men
formed of him soon after his arrival at the shed. With his knowledge
frightened eyes and seemed merrier than usual. She understood hardly
    CHAPTER XIII
But the count had already recovered from his excitement.

and yet during his whole reign never once attempted to execute that
On the morning of the day that the young couple were to arrive, Princess
what looked like a squadron of horsemen in various uniforms. Two of them
mistake and that Anatole meant to flirt with Mademoiselle Bourienne,

life: remorse and illness. The only good is the absence of those evils.
“That’s our battery,” said the staff officer indicating the


“No, I hate my life,” Pierre muttered, wincing.
campfires; the lice that devoured him warmed his body.) The one thing
himself reflected in his wife. He felt the good and bad within himself
killed, but all that is being done at present is only play. The fact is


again.”
“Mais charmante!” said he, evidently referring to Natásha, who did
words, and that any reference to the details of his life infringed the
Son of God, came down to earth and told us that this life is but for

of the state of the fatherland and offered various conjectures as to the
aunt, Anna Pávlovna mentioned each one’s name and then left them.
without scruple to forget her own grief. She began asking Dron about the
happening—Kutúzov seems to them something indefinite and pitiful, and
shouted Nicholas, banging the table—very little to the point as it
His servants too—Terénty and Váska—in their own way noticed the change
be more imitators; and secondly because you are one of those gentlemen
Alexéevich was and how just before their arrival that drunken imbecile
A great crowd of generals gathered round him, and Count Rostopchín, who

remember!”
calamity! What a calamity!”

detachment no one knew anything of the general position of affairs. They
than five hundred paces from where Kutúzov was standing, a dense French
patriotic intentions with which he had come that in spite of all his
to come to Moscow.
showing under his open shirt, he stood in a majestic pose in the light
discussed our interests like one family, and have rendered account to

say to different people.”
With the natural capacity of an Italian for changing the expression of
condescension and patronage in his treatment of Berg and Véra. After
And the staff captain rose and turned away from Rostóv.


notice—forget what I have said!”
Natásha, throwing a clean pocket handkerchief over her hair and holding
“Was Kutúzov well? When had he left Krems?” and so on. The Emperor
“Where is the commander in chief?” asked Bolkónski.
noncommissioned officer with a bandaged head. He had been wounded in the
When spring came on, the soldiers found a plant just showing out of the
All the suite drew back and Rostóv saw the general talking for some
We see the same if we watch moment by moment the movement of historical
right above the Vólga,” said the courier.
gentle look of her large luminous eyes, very beautiful at that moment,
for your obstinacy,” said Kírsten.
thoughts.
chance and genius.

and reports up to the time of his death. He alone said that the loss of
come on and will meet them with the fire of the whole battalion’—and
and, commanding the Uhlans to follow him, spurred his horse and galloped

recourse to chance for an explanation of those small events which made
Anna Pávlovna’s “At Home” was like the former one, only the
How have you spent it? In riotous orgies and debauchery, receiving
Dimmler began to play; Natásha went on tiptoe noiselessly to the table,
dead. All that he saw and heard seemed to confirm this terror.

we were angels somewhere there, and have been here, and that is why we
develop existed within him. His meeting with Pierre formed an epoch in
began has a war been fought under such conditions as those that obtained
She had noticed with what dissatisfaction he turned from the look she

Emperors were staying. In a square he saw tables being set up and
was, dear fellows!” Karatáev concluded and sat for a long time silent,
You were not right, not quite in the right, you were impetuous...”

officer ran out of the ranks and taking him by the elbow dragged him to
approaching enemy unexpectedly. Bennigsen did not know this and moved
and how particularly gracious he was to a certain lady, or that Prince
Natásha, Sónya, Madame Schoss, and two maids got into Nicholas’
but thought of other things.
Natásha without waiting for Princess Mary to finish again looked
proved physically impossible.
atmosphere, to be unable to stir, and to await something unknown,
events the so-called great men are labels giving names to events, and
that is, an event took place opposed to human reason and to human

On Saturday, the thirty-first of August, everything in the Rostóvs’
listened with a kindly smile and nods of approval, as he always did,
proclamation appeared about two months ago. The count was informed of
eternal, distant, and unknown the presence of which he had felt
and commendation are essential, just as grease is necessary to wheels
equipped himself with a mental telescope and looked into remote space,
the road he reined in his horse, hesitating whether to ride along it or
from his horse in a pool of blood. Nobody gave him a look or thought of
or abandoned. Three wagons had been raided and robbed by stragglers

As soon as Natásha had finished she went up to him and asked how he
Emperor,” thought Rostóv.

an anteroom, and a hall, which were familiar to him, into a long low
Club is closed and the police are leaving.”

that absent-minded crank, a grand seigneur husband who was in no one’s
Borís knew nothing about the Boulogne expedition; he did not read the

to a long-standing impression related to his innermost feelings, had its

modern history, like a deaf man, answers questions no one has asked.

sarcastically and very cleverly, though with much caution.
in the black dress was a good, kind, excellent creature who would not
of her beauty and fearful because of it. Her face struck Pierre and,
Dólokhov, Pierre saw clearly that what was said in the letter might be
quarters were, he believed, not far off.
tent.
“You’re always like that; you thwow a thing down anywhere and forget
be, anyway he is an honorable and brave old colonel! You’re quick at

hearing or understanding her own words, what she had told hundreds of

standing close by, outside the door. It was sad and painful for him

kindly folk and form the best possible setting for this strikingly
Prince Andrew. They had known each other previously in Petersburg, but
Petersburg.
“What? Saw the real Mack? With hands and feet?”
“What do you think, dear fellows? That murderer confessed to the
farther along the edge of the wood stood Mítka, the count’s other
road, the highroad along which the troops marched, there was no such

the difficult problem of what was taking place before them. From the
from Prince Andrew to the staff officer.
dried and warmed themselves, cooked their porridge for the first time

Lavrúshka, however, ran up to Karp and seized him by the arms from

preoccupied that only in bed was he able to be by himself. He had to
relation of the forces of nature to inevitability, or of the essence of

the pleasure of spending the evening with you.”

dozens of soldiers, continually replaced by others, who ran from the
“Princess Drubetskáya to see Prince Vasíli Sergéevich,” he called
and, having spent the day with him, returned to Barclay and condemned,
(She always ended with these words.) “He is an excellent man!”

watched him. She smiled, hid her face in her handkerchief, and remained

struck up more loudly, and this man with bare legs jumped very high and
hussar with cold, red hands, and raising his eyebrows gazed about him

With the naked eye Prince Andrew saw below them to the right, not more
The infantry in front of them parted into platoons to allow the cavalry
Evidently the explanations furnished by these historians being mutually
everything here is rotten and that an overthrow is coming: I don’t
for the horses or the cattle. That was a misfortune no one could remedy,
through the closed doors came the sound of difficult passages—twenty
esteem his lofty qualities. I will detain you no longer, General; you
ready to throw herself into all the pleasures of life as before; but at
malignantly at Márya Dmítrievna.
“The commander in chief is engaged,” said Kozlóvski, going
Rostóvs. He had been in Moscow several times, and had passed near
As the bearers, among whom was Anna Mikháylovna, passed the young man

of those fifty thousand men who were left in hospitals and in graves
darkness by his white hat.
“Now the fun begins,” thought Anatole, sitting down with a smile
respectfully over the outstretched hand and not keeping it waiting a


Andrew remained silent, and his expression was so forbidding that Pierre
stories had the sensual character which Frenchmen regard as the special
For additional contact information:     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
defend their country—the very incitement which was the chief cause of
which also oppressed him.
out. The flames now died down and were lost in the black smoke, now
else.
The Pávlograd regiment, belonging to that part of the army which had
“What are you staring at, you good-for-nothing?... The count will be
to rest after their hard marches.
“No, it’s only indigestion?... Say it’s only indigestion, say so,
street.
“What is the matter?” she asked.
passed. When they reached Yaroslávl the wound had begun to fester
cost; another was saying that all silk goods had now got dear. The clerk
block the road to Moscow as before, the aim of the French had not been
soldier and not to think of the general trend of affairs, but only of
or the announcement of his intention to take the wonder-working icon of

darkness, was suddenly lit up by a new brightness, full of significance.


beautiful, radiant eyes. It was as if joy—a supreme joy apart from the
back to the Kolochá and could get no farther; while the divisions of
make his bow and leave, and only listened because he could not help
Russian army were convinced that the battle of Borodinó was a victory.
But Rostóv pulled away his arm and, with as much anger as though
Still laughing, Speránski held out his soft white hand to Prince
a few steps he stopped, having apparently decided that these were good
Let the others make mistakes now!” said they, arguing that our
wife’s circle, which did not interest him, that air of unconcern,
responsibility, very judiciously wished to receive.

this movement, by what laws was it governed? asks the mind of man.
invalid chair, a wax taper in his left hand, was leaning his left arm on
a fictitious but a live character who like every man had his personal
Vladímir road, and a fourth, rather considerable detachment is stationed
Armfeldt, a rake and an intriguer; Wintzingerode, a fugitive French
The question is that of saving Russia. Is it better to give up Moscow
in front of the orchestra partition, looking at the Rostóvs’ box.
beautiful out in the fields, the little town presented a particularly

“He was here a minute ago but has just gone that way,” someone told him,
The princess sank helplessly into an armchair beside her father and
fell with stupid simplicity, but consistently, and belabored the French
while the poorer remained and burned and destroyed what was left.
dark-faced icon with an embossed metal cover. This was the icon that had

but which only wounded the self-love of both sides, and millions of

kingdoms and displacement of peoples was in course of preparation.
similar to that which female Magdalenes have, based on the same hope of
Prince Andrew gazed with anxious curiosity at that impassive face
pockets had seized her by the neck.


my respects to monsieur your father and my compliments to Mademoiselle
receives them.”

without reasoning. With an affectation of respect which evidently struck
Dólokhov paused.
seize some horsecloths, though he had told him the Russians were there.
Junot’s spoon might be of some use, but that cold and hungry soldiers
him amiably but behaved as if Balashëv were one of his own courtiers,
laughed blandly at her naïve diplomacy but listened to what she had
“No; I mean do you know Natásha Rostóva?”
Courage. 6. Generosity. 7. The love of death.
disgrace such as that of Ulm, or to utter destruction. But to forestall
incessantly, kissing her head, her hands, her face, and feeling her own
He glanced at his cousin and the young lady visitor; and they were both
and have another look and then come back to me.”

“How understand me!” cried her father angrily. “Prince Vasíli
trying in vain to find the answer to some question.
of the cost of rebuilding the town and country houses, speaking of this

second at Smolénsk”—he showed a scar on his cheek—“and this leg which as
“She’d tired herself out, she’d run it down three times by
it is only a momentary undefinable sensation of life.

situated,” said Prince Andrew.


Prince Bagratión, having reached the highest point of our right flank,
close to her, of his breath and the smell of him, and could think only
when they again heard an unexpectedly violent whistling which suddenly
to say. He did not venture to repeat what he had said at his first
Emperors met. He saw the raft, decorated with monograms, saw Napoleon
again turning to the count. “Zat is how ve old hussars look at it, and
the other committeemen. “There will be many toasts, it’s time to
“Well, I shall live. Ah, how splendid!”


Pierre replied that the child belonged to a woman in a black coat who
farther still.
be.




prepared for them.
“Oh, do as you like! Am I hindering anyone?” she said, not surrendering


self-sacrificing spirit too,” she said to herself. “Yes, he is poor now
movement which first increases and then slackens. What was the cause of
“What are you making such a noise about over there?” Márya
maid’s voice at the door.
summoned Berthier, began pacing up and down the bank with him, giving
PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
of the army and of the men and parties engaged in it, and he deduced for
“Natásha insists on seeing Count Peter Kirílovich,” said she.

visitors on his right. Midway down the long table on one side sat the
troops were ill-clad, exhausted, and had lost a third of their number
“Papa! Here’s Berg coming to see us,” said she, looking out of the

office. On the previous day Plátov reconnoitered with two Cossack
which to reply to Dólokhov’s words. But before he had thought of
constitutes the essence of the conception called power.
Canal. And there was the bear swimming about with the policeman on his
did Novosíltsev get? None. The English have not understood and cannot
him, Bonaparte had made in his campaigns and even in politics. His

Anna Mikháylovna, though her circumstances had improved, was still
embrace him, cling to him, and make him look at me with those searching
nods with acquaintances near her. From habit she scrutinized the ladies’
According to their accounts a reaction took place at that time in Russia

position; but innumerable circumstances and the reappearance of French
They surrounded Ramballe, lifted him on the crossed arms of two
By his age he should have belonged to the younger men, but by his wealth
on her lips, she got up and left the room. All Nicholas’ animation


    BOOK SIX: 1808 - 10
Catherine’s court, Count Bezúkhov.
evidently decomposes Alexander’s power into the components: Talleyrand,
service, and he at once understood his role, letting his hostess make
tone. “Everything seems funny to you, but this isn’t at all a joke....”
in and that the countess was being attended by a charlatan who might
“She really is a dear little thing,” said Rostóv to Ilyín, who was
“Ah, Vesénny?” said a Cossack.
she felt any symptoms of pregnancy. She laughed contemptuously and said
pronouncing French with evident difficulty, and speaking even slower
I have had a letter from my brother, who announces his speedy arrival
commander were to give orders to fight, confusion would result but the
himself and which, he said, swarmed with hares. Nicholas agreed, and the

And he also passed on with the wagon. Then came some merry soldiers who
Przebyszéwski’s and Langeron’s columns which had already gone down
“The execution of the Duc d’Enghien,” declared Monsieur Pierre,
The huntsman stood halfway up the knoll holding up his whip and the
him, this expedient of an inquiry and trial seemed unnecessary. It was
anxious. The courtiers suffered because of the suffering the suspense
led on by his example, began to do the same, she knew that they were on
sight of Murat’s mantle and ostrich plumes, qu’il n’y voit que du
“Do you remember, sire, what you did me the honor to say at Smolénsk?”
beyond the pleasure of the moment, nothing troubles him and so he is
the prevailing silence. Some minutes passed. A second and a third report
Having reached the left flank, instead of going to the front where the
On the way home, Prince Andrew could not refrain from asking Kutúzov,


from bondage glorify the name of Russia!”
head seemed familiar to Prince Andrew: they were lifting him up and


terrible dividing line of uncertainty and fear—resembling the line
The third consideration is the degree to which we apprehend that
CHAPTER I
disablement and death was caused by the balls and bullets that flew over
Toward nine o’clock in the morning, when the troops were already moving

officers’ order, the men sat on the ground. One, having taken off his
Bagratión gave no further orders and silently continued to walk on in

veneration—especially of an evening when he came in to tea in his
Nicholas standing in a fallow field could see all his whips.
noticed this, as he noticed every shade of Princess Mary’s character
about was gaiety and women, and as according to his ideas there
In his soul there suddenly arose such an unexpected turmoil of youthful
“Please,” he uttered with an effort.

the captain, and passed out into the street.
up to the knowledge of the most complex economic and historic laws).
for common activity—in agriculture, trade, and every administration.
concentration of fighting at one point, and the hesitation of all the
sure that everyone was submissive, but that all the same it was dull,
came and leaned on his elbows, facing her and beside Mademoiselle
“Well, then, let’s be quick. Borís, come here,” said Natásha.
But the convoyman took no notice of the word “general” and shouted
at this moment I were asked: ‘Would you rather be what you were before
The hussars ran back to the men who held their horses; their voices
adve’sawies have wefused a weconciliation, please pwoceed. Take your
“I ordered you not to let them eat that Máshka woot stuff!”
beg him to forgive, forgive, forgive me for everything....”



power only because they fulfill the will of the people which has been
embarrassing situation, and the expression on his face was invariably
farther, probably along the line of the French camp. Rostóv no longer
the best of all. If only you did not go away! Do you remember how
of Prince Andrew Bolkónski, appointed to the command of a regiment of
and Madame Schoss, who had not yet undressed, went out with him. Only
“I have, good sir,” she answered garrulously. “Just at

completely altered. He was not rich, but would spend his last groat to
“I should like to see the great man,” he said, alluding to Napoleon,
defeated. An army has suffered defeat, and at once a people loses its

already some five officers. Mary Hendríkhovna, a plump little blonde
strange lightness did not again leave him.
    CHAPTER X
Next day, having been invited by the count, Prince Andrew dined with the
but not the army staff. Besides these, there were in attendance on the
beloved. And on its pages I saw a beautiful representation of a maiden

legs came in from both sides and began dancing all together. Then the
“From the governor,” said Lavrúshka in a sleepy voice. “A courier has
interview with Kutúzov he went back to his regiment reassured as to
their mother’s absence....”
“Denísov, let him alone, I know who has taken it,” said Rostóv,
that man has vanquished me. He has taken hold of me. I could not resist
restraining his tears of pity for the Emperor, he rode on in utter

insurmountably difficult. At the same time that he refused the colonel’s

with him, but in 1811 they again quarreled and again began killing many


down over the wound, felt it, and sighed deeply. Then he made a sign to
She ran to her father, but he feebly waved his arm, pointing to her

Animated by that address Anna Pávlovna’s guests talked for a long time

howitzers of the Guard’s artillery against either one or other of the

down, raising her knees to her chin, kicking out and laughing almost
to alter it....”
found in it a new enjoyment.

a fresh and vigorous woman of fifty, but a month later she left her room
very first days of their married life Natásha had announced her demands.
As a result of the hostility between Kutúzov and Bennigsen, his Chief of
Smolénsk. A general was sent to survey the position. This general,
“Well, are they all right?” said the soldier with a smile. “You should

is known to the historians: to one of them this goal is the greatness of
as Pierre could see was one vast charred ruin. On all sides there were
The officer went up to Makár Alexéevich and took him by the collar.
Bells rang, the stewards rushed forward, and—like rye shaken together
“What an extraordinary genius!” Prince Andrew suddenly exclaimed,
did this happen?” Princess Mary inquired.
CHAPTER XXI
Several soldiers gathered by the wall of the trench, looking out to see

the Austrian adjutant, he addressed Bolkónski.
evening and under the influence of wine—followed all that was told him,
Pierre seized the crossbeam, tugged, and wrenched the oak frame out with
control in case of an engagement.
splendidly.”
behind the carriage he stepped onto the pavement.
The officer came nearer and suddenly his face flushed crimson.
as far as the door and stopped and looked ingratiatingly at Pierre. But
of operation was too extended, and it proposed that instead of, or
silent.
had come in civilian clothes, that he had difficulty in getting a

“Nicholas! Come out in your dressing gown!” said Natásha’s voice.
Tíkhon went and told the prince.
caressing word such as he had never used to her before. “Why didn’t you
    CHAPTER XIV

diverse and familiar personalities, both old and young. The old men,
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
would have to bear the whole responsibility for all that might happen.
The old man was still sitting in the ornamental garden, like a fly
to go any faster. He liked giving a painful lash on the neck to some
lie before us.
guilty. But Hélène, like a really great man who can do whatever

than that. We took Vienna, Berlin, Madrid, Naples, Rome, Warsaw, all

“Come nearer, come nearer, friend! I used to be the only one to tell
“Merci, chère amie, d’être venue.” *
“What is this?” thought Nicholas, listening to her with widely
the house where the commander in chief was.
away from the Petersburg and Moscow roads. The reason for this was
translated the articles of the Roman and French codes into Russian,
performed just where he did not happen to be. And he was always in a

thinking? I mustn’t forget. How shall I speak to the Emperor? No,
not move, though her little bare foot, thrust out from under the quilt,

“Yes, yes, yes!” cried Natásha, joyfully.
no one knows when? Armfeldt says our army is cut in half, and Paulucci

a desire to do something for them, a desire for their approval.—So I
ahead of it, when it turns frequently the wave ahead of it also turns
constrained and oppressed. When she was not looking at him she felt that

neither of them could think of her as a rival, so they began dressing
Before partisan warfare had been officially recognized by the

jurisprudence.
What I say is: ‘Join hands, you who love the right, and let there be but
of the French were not to blame in the matter. Moscow was set on fire by

seemed about to cry, but this did not last long.

me! That’s the sort of man he is, and nothing more,” replied
and quickening his pace went down the street.
in on Vereshchágin. He turned away. “Go fas... faster!” he cried in a
In spite of the obscurity of the soldier’s words Pierre understood what
always accompanied any reference of hers to the Imperial family, “has
Many historians say that the French did not win the battle of Borodinó
a rage) and called for the company commander.

away and he had just managed to catch her, “didn’t he tell you how
“Yes.”
“As may happen,” said Rostóv.
as if he had come back to life after a heavy swoon. He held his head
(of whom the lad was also particularly fond), and especially Pierre’s
would have taken the icon, but she stopped him. Andrew understood,
he thought as he looked at the tall lad flourishing his arm. And this
away by the process of research and can therefore regard the event

and a third day’s march, and at last, on the first of September when
child’s little chair while, frowning and with trembling hands, he
to escape from all this horror and misery; but on the one hand the force
wish, to court society’s favor. Now he alone was blamed for what had
Emperor.
“At home?” asked Pierre.
or even to wish to be thought to listen. Exactly opposite Weyrother,
And there were as many advisers there as here...” he went on, returning
might hope for help from his fellows and the definite place he held
For us with the standard of good and evil given us by Christ, no human
differently. People accustomed to misunderstand or to forget these
the hut. The panes were rattling in the little windows and his groom was
of the night. The gloom that enveloped the army was filled with their
passed, the Pávlograd division was ordered to advance. In Wischau
arms, legs, and face, which the doctors attributed to eating this root.

some incomprehensible, mysterious power continued to control them, and
liberty not to believe me and I don’t even care whether you do or
his camp,” said he. “What does that mean? Either he is retreating,
down on the sofa in an attitude of despair, then rose, went to the door
conditions of life will arise, which will seem quite ordinary to others
She was gazing where she knew him to be; but she could not imagine him
defend Moscow to the last drop of blood and is even ready to fight in
Alpátych turned to the peasants and ordered two of them by name to come

affair of the war went on independently of them, as it had to go:

aroused him. He started and opened his eyes.
knowledge.
be?”
caught her up. It was lucky the maids ran in just then....”
who were guiding him, he was not only doing nothing wrong, but was doing
with peasants and peasant women, gentlemen’s country houses, fields
Though the surface of the sea of history seemed motionless, the movement


chief’s quarters?’ They were pointed out. ‘Please to wait.’

Timókhin to the subaltern beside him.
Princess Mary sighed, and having crossed herself went down, thinking
carrying a load of wood.
He shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands. Pierre wished to
military group of the east, (2) that they should abandon all established
reform by marrying him to Prince Andrew’s sister.
with flour whitening their carts—on that narrow dam amid the wagons
He looked and recognizing in her both the old and the new Sónya, and
then she thought this would be rude after what he had done for her; then
were officiating that day with the bishop. The clerk several times used
The Emperor entered the hall through a broad path between two lines of
vot’e homme!” *
joyful sensations, and chiefly of the complete peace of mind and inner
that if anyone should come from you they were to have the books.”
chairs and pushed them up again. Pierre unfolded his cold table napkin
to go to Petersburg, and even to re-enter the service, kept springing

courts only strengthened his desire to belong to that higher world.
to Himself, for in Him alone is truth and peace,” said she in a voice
hearing that they wished to see the count, said his excellency was worse
Five minutes later Princess Mary from her room heard something heavy
The dinner was nearly over, and the Emperor, munching a biscuit, rose
CHAPTER XXVIII
continued what the French had begun. Trains of peasant carts came to

intercourse contrary to all laws of reason, the words themselves were
avoided looking at the young couple, and heedless and unobservant as
misery. A man offended you and you shot him, and you say you do not
the universe had crumbled before his eyes and only meaningless ruins
The son sighed, thus admitting that his father had understood him. The


breaking, the rain had ceased, and the clouds were dispersing. It felt



middle horse, sank in the snow, which was dry and glittered like sugar,

    * Nicholas.

when they want to prove something else, say that power produces events.
room. The prince stood still; his lively glittering eyes from under
The stormcloud had come upon them, and in every face the fire which
spend the night,” and during the first day’s journey that resting place
offended tone.

Emperor Napoleon if we take this bridge, so let us three go and take

be guiding. Ever since the enemy’s entry into Smolénsk he had in


had followed, and only the heavens promised peace. Toward morning
Nizhegórod estates.
friend’s hand.
“But nowhere in Europe is there anything like that,” said Napoleon.

simple ones. My whole idea is that if vicious people are united and

In dealing with this period they sternly condemn the historical
and that daredevil after her!” said Anna Mikháylovna, wishing to show
The Military Governor of Moscow, who had been assiduous in sending
“That’s the owner himself,” cried several voices.
At the Tróitsa monastery they had spoken of the past, and he had told
a whisper that the prince was sleeping, and hastily closed the door.
the way he walked through the ranks behind the generals, bending forward
was riding a thin thoroughbred horse with sunken sides. Like his horse,
peace so long as a single armed enemy remained on Russian soil and told
bald head, over which she again looked at the letter and the portrait,
with that air of escaping from the ills of life with which unhappy



know how I long to dance, how splendidly I dance, and how they would
acquaintance. But we’ll speak of that later on,” she added, glancing
The Mason cleared his throat huskily, as old men do, and called his
that affair would have ended ill.”
looked. Her eyes were dry and glistening, her lips compressed, her


“On Tuesday between eight and nine. It will give me great pleasure.”


CHAPTER I
Princess Mary with a gentle smile looked now at Pierre and now at
we were retreating from Sventsyáni we dare not touch a stick or a wisp

“What, to Petersburg? What is Petersburg? Who is there in Petersburg?”
drawing room, where he embraced the count, kissed the hands of Natásha
say that the theater of war is Poland and the enemy will never get
have some generally say. They said that undoubtedly war, particularly

the left, the firing became more distinct. Kutúzov had stopped and was
heard that the war was being discussed had turned from his partner with
in silence. “In the first place, there must have been such a confusion

him—and said that his son would not live with them.
into bad company, a drunkard’s relapse into drunkenness, and so on are
good news? There has been an encounter with Mortier? A victory? It was
    CHAPTER XVIII
what he was laughing at. Everything her father did inspired her with
was lying on the table and went out of his study by the other door.

“Oh, well, well!” remarked the regimental commander. “Still, one
to Russia after him, but all the same he knew that however long it might
day there, when preparing to go to Kiev, he fell ill and was laid up
Tuesday.

to find and execute the incendiaries. And the scoundrel Rostopchín was
“Oh, come, my dear count! C’est la fable de tout Moscou. Je vous admire,

not thinking her own thoughts but feeling bound to think like her father
and painfully felt. My father talks of nothing but marches and
many secondary personages accompanying the army because their principals
he is regretfully abandoning Moscow. Sire! Kutúzov’s action decides the
No one slept.
drove his huge spurs in violently, and the horse, flourishing its tail
the part played by free will in the general affairs of humanity. A



eyes.
the less attractive a woman is the more constant she is likely to be,”
“What a bwute you are!... Well?”
the estate and home of my birth—my father, who died of grief. I belong
a man he is! Now don’t think badly of me or of him. I don’t think
in that respect Pfuel was a genius, but at the same time it had to be
this conjecture was confirmed by the sad tone in which her elders spoke
had been put in position?”
health, and to reminiscences of the gay and amusing times he had spent
Willarski was going to Moscow and they agreed to travel together.
spirit. She went to bed later and rose earlier than any of them, and
could be attained, yet it seemed best to the adherents of this third
to her? I am so grateful to you that I would willingly sacrifice
remains of sheds, chairs, tables, wheels, tubs, and everything that they

    CHAPTER V
movements are conditioned by the activity of the nerves; the soul and
and his thoughts followed one another with extraordinary clearness and
“It’s all very well for you, Iván Sidórych, to talk,” said the first
gazing at the moonlight through the frosty windowpanes.
me!” He began to laugh. “Well, what of it! I hope we’ll get better
the hope of a less cruel fate, should be certain that inevitable and
succeeded!’ The Prussian generals pride themselves on being polite to

influence of the depression that possessed him he valued neither his
not interest and did not even exist for Alpátych.
firing at Augesd.


one’s head is gone one doesn’t weep for one’s hair! Take what any of you
hussars, told them to follow him, and trotted downhill in the direction
He cautiously released the shoulder she leaned on, looked into her face,
thousand men breathlessly gazing at him and the regimental commander did
Though the conversation was very incoherent and Véra was angry at the
“Why, have you too much money?”

today agree with Pfuel, tomorrow with his opponent, and the day after,
triumphantly secured the mop and still did not realize what awaited him,
wooded banks above the winding river vanishing in the purple distance,
impulsive man who had always moved in the highest administrative circles

centralization of power, resistance to Europe, and so on. Men went

individuals who appear to us to have established that mode of government
women, ‘women and wine’ I don’t understand!”
trying to prove by physiology and comparative zoology was not merely

hardly any of the staff were there—they had gone to the church service.
“Puff! puff!”—and two clouds arose pushing one another and blending
“No, no!” cried Natásha, “she and I have already talked it over.

consulting him as to how to remedy this unfortunate affair. It seemed to

of battle. There were still the same suffering, exhausted, and sometimes
important these pictures appeared to me, with what profound meaning they
Natásha experienced a feeling new to her, a sense of the possibility
gone. Having got warm in his corner, he fell asleep and did not leave
ladies—” He turned with the same request to Denísov who was also a
a snack, and washed it down with half a bottle of his favorite Bordeaux.
Pierre had come just at dinnertime and was sitting awkwardly in the
years been suffering from a painful disease of the bladder. No one has
“Uncle” looked round disapprovingly at Pétya and Natásha. He did
“Do just come and see what a moon!... Oh, how lovely! Come here....
The colonel told them that the declaration of war had already appeared
frequently addressing one to whom the title was still a novelty.

power, were commanders of genius.
in the absence of opponents, between two councils would simply solicit
sole weapon against him was prayer, and she tried to pray. She assumed
generals.
Prince Andrew stopped short.
she wished to and only refrained out of regard for his modesty.
Rostóv saw nothing but the hussars running all around him, their spurs
with a distressed face left the room to find Sónya.
Bourienne. When she entered with her heavy step, treading on her heels,
of Alms” went round to all the brothers. Pierre would have liked
to my bivouac; let my doctor, Larrey, examine their wounds. Au revoir,

burden to him, and Bóry’s life is only just beginning....”
were passing through a crowd at a fair. He pushed through, evidently
gave some orders to his men. Pétya held his horse by the bridle,
captured, of his deposition, and of the choice of a new ruler for
coat and trousers, the prince undressed, sat down heavily on the
“We don’t expect to get him home! We must ask the doctor.”
accent.
called, but in the fact that he alone understood the significance of


long journey too hard and too dangerous for her and his son.
thousand run from eight thousand, as at Austerlitz. What science can

connections... Well, then, you just...”
Bedouin twice and successfully put him to the showy trot in which the
“Well, mon cher, have you got the manifesto?” asked the old count. “The
usual and awaited his son with great impatience.


They seized Makár Alexéevich by the arms and dragged him to the door.

louder than usual and that they turned him over oftener. She could not
Prince Andrew smiled ironically.
what was going on in the passage. Some women passing with quiet steps in
not the least feeling of fear. He was fearless, not because he had grown
man is as surly as a dog.”
“No.”
Mítenka’s wife and sisters-in-law thrust their heads and frightened
to her.
“Just a few oats?” said Misha, cheerfully and readily.
upon him. What is conscience and the perception of right and wrong
“Do you play then?” asked Natásha.

a long, greasy, flowered silk waistcoat next to his sallow, thin bare
CHAPTER XX
before Krems was really of small importance in view of such events as
and the sound of a torban, drowned every now and then by shouts. These

order to be able to improve it, but he was unable to speak. Many voices
face was calm, gentle, and happy. Clutching her breast to keep herself
Cossacks’ shanties and of horses tethered together could be seen. Behind
bent on him confused him. “You are flurried—compose yourself!” Napoleon

went to the mirror, and gazed a long time at his own face. Then he would
lieutenant general, our dear Prince Auersperg von Mautern himself.
an actually existing phenomenon.



the house; but when it was possible to have a domestic serf conscripted
“They received me and my news as one receives a dog in a game of
footing that all who knew them, including Anatole himself, respected him
    CHAPTER XV
where the loose covers had been removed from the furniture, a servant
added: “Oh yes; take the battle of Friedland, which I think the count
election...” thought he. But now the campaign was beginning, and he had
speaking quickly with a harsh German accent, looking to both sides and
Without replying, the sergeant, with a resolute air, mounted and rode

The tall lad, standing in the porch, turned his bleared eyes from the

The Emperor interrupted him.
Vladímirovich Bezúkhov’s house. “My dear Borís,” said the

to avoid meeting Natásha, but despite that resolution he called again
It was only now that he noticed wounded men staggering along or being
hugging and kissing him. Another and yet another creature of the same
under whom he had served in Turkey, galled him), but he was convinced

And clutching the spare gray locks on his temples the count left the
touch it with one’s hand.
Borís blushed.
Decide, my dear, good, gentle Marie, whom I have always loved as a
Count?” he went on, continuing the conversation they had begun. And
animal.” * Her success as a beautiful and elegant woman did not
“Perhaps later on I may tell you, my dear boy, that if I had not been
such histories as Thiers’ will be interesting and instructive and may
bowing and scraping. Everything was just as everybody always has it,
him. You know the story of the handkerchief? It is delightful!”
the aim of supporting one another in the path of virtue, and that is how
affair as follows:
Pávlograd commander. The commanders met with polite bows but with
Denísov screwed up his face and pointing over his shoulder with his
     * “Indeed, Sire, we shall do everything it is possible to
She grew confused, glanced round, and, seeing the doll she had thrown
Moscow had to burn as inevitably as a heap of shavings has to burn on
who was sitting silently beside him, what he thought of tomorrow’s
Have you got it, Makéev?”
then named Prince Vasíli in an inquiring whisper, then pointed to the
“I was attached; I’m on duty.”
He turned to Kozlóvski with urgent questions.
the arrival of the rest of the troops who were on their way from Vienna,

As the Tsar rode up to one flank of the battalions, which presented
“Those verses... those verses of Márin’s... how do they go, eh? Those he
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
little mental workshop—but the pleasure given by real women gifted with
staff that evening, to the officer of the Horse Guards, referring to
rubbers he watched her and his friend.
almost all honest-hearted young men do, that is, as a possible wife,
like strangers.”

aim was to unite them, though uniting the armies was no advantage if we
wreaths of black smoke rolled from under the roof. There was another
themselves and the connection in which the historical persons stood to
orders, but only assented to or dissented from what others suggested.
“Now, Sídorov, you have a try!”
ancient capital, the New Jerusalem, receives her Christ”—he placed a
Alexander and Napoleon, with the long train of their suites, approached
to meet Kutúzov at the castle where the latter was to stay. In undress


The trees were dripping. Quiet talking was heard. The horses neighed and
her joy settled on Natásha’s face.
of each shot, as at the word of command, the whole squadron with its
not staying here long this time—nor are you—I will try to amuse

the predominance of moral strength, for, not to mention heroes such as
And he released Bolkónski’s arm to indicate that he had now quite
A little behind, on a poor, small, lean Kirghíz mount with an enormous

CHAPTER XXXI
herself into a room adjoining the drawing room, occupied herself trying


infantry, and now cavalry: they appeared, fired, fell, collided, not
all, like children of my own, as you know.”
manner peculiar to herself.
   To feel that in this world there’s one
sign of strength.
said through her tears that there was nothing to prevent her marrying,
to him and took the letters.

my friend... I only need see Prince Vasíli Sergéevich: he is staying

face to Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his hand.
the process of the flight and disintegration of the French army went on
collapsed so that I don’t live at all—everything seems hateful to
much to tell them but dare not say it before the old countess. Denísov,

her face seemed to say as she caught sight of herself. “Well, and very
Berg drove up to his father-in-law’s house in his spruce little trap
could make only one movement at that single moment of time, it could not
“Go and apologize, your excellency. Yes, go!”
Bolkónski belonged to a distant, romantic past, when after supper and
other women, and that now, especially after having seen many women in
‘I’ve widden twenty miles and have duties to attend to and no time
had seen the previous evening at Borís’—ran forward and, bowing
everything!” (He put one arm around Pierre and the other around his

The count remembered the wolf he had let slip and his encounter with
country do we get any rest? Theatricals, hunting, and heaven knows what
road. Bagratión’s exhausted and hungry detachment, which alone
strange to him that his long-felt wish, which had seemed unattainable,
Only two things indicated the social condition of Moscow—the rabble,
house near the Crimean bridge. On his way through the streets Pierre
love has no aim but the happiness of those I love; so, Nicholas, I
my dream.

power. Pierre, who knew she was very stupid, sometimes attended, with a

aides-de-camp in attendance that a dinner and ball should be given for
Hélène’s hand several times. After a while they were left alone
Prince Andrew glanced at Kutúzov’s face only a foot distant from him
to say next to introduce a fresh subject. Princess Mary was silent. It

getting neither better nor worse. He was unconscious and lay like
the Roman, Spanish, or French realm; to another it is liberty, equality,
their own resources what might be needed for the success of the fete.
drew in his legs and sat up, seeking a firm center of gravity. He sucked

(the family solicitor) “and he says the same.”
question again presented itself whether she was not guilty, whether she
The head of the column had already descended into the hollow. The clash
Not one of the plans Nicholas tried succeeded; the estate was sold by
thank you with my whole heart.” To Rostóv every word sounded like a
deed, we never get a conception of freedom in time. For if I examine
behind her ears just as carefully, and when she entered her drawing


he was saying.
foot, which he was then touching with his own under the clavichord.
the silence continued. Only among the back rows of the people, who were
misery. That could not be, yet he awaited with a sinking heart the
essential attitude of the masses. Only in the highest spheres did
domestic reasons.
yesterday. And Uncle is away....” To tell Márya Dmítrievna who had
    CHAPTER XVII

    BOOK TWO: 1805


about it,” said the countess.

bring round to the superstitiousness of old maids, or the petting
trembled, and tears instantly appeared in his fine blue eyes.


to another. Now he would take up the position of a practical man and
naval officer, was speaking in one of the rooms, and a small crowd was
and eight feet long. At one end of the trench, steps were cut out and
Dólokhov’s and Pétya’s steps as they advanced to the fire leading their
use will peace be when he is no longer here?” Princess Mary murmured,
faultfinding, understood nothing of what she heard; she only wondered
Pávlovna, shaking her little shriveled finger at him.
stages of his journey.
high time!”
understand?”

Until Prince Andrew settled in Boguchárovo its owners had always been
been lying in the stubble, but in front of him was the autumn sowing

at Dólokhov and his eyes dropped, the something terrible and monstrous
ball flew past, rose in the stirrups and sank back again. The soldiers
“Your excellency, there are some political prisoners, Meshkóv,
“To change the water in this glass. I am just finishing the design.”
of you! Well, thank God. Now lie down. We can still get a nap before
conscious, is intelligible to us only in as far as we know the laws of
it was far to the Krémlin. The porter, listening in perplexity to the
disconcert him. He did not lose sight either of the welfare of his

“But I questioned him,” said Tíkhon. “He said he didn’t know much.

Sónya!” she said almost with tears in her voice. “There never,
At that time in the Rostóvs’ house there prevailed an amorous

another candle. Still lower, beyond the turn of the staircase, one
The farther forward and nearer the enemy he went, the more orderly and
was very valuable. Officers who approached him with disturbed
“How...” she began her question but stopped short.
hands and occasionally ran his eyes over the score against him. He had
that the French retreat from Moscow was a series of victories for
Denísov’s horse, Bedouin, was in debt all round, to his comrades and
the old, the young with the young, and the hostess at the tea table, on
that Natásha had too much of something, and that because of this
differently. I would not be silly and afraid of things, I would simply

of the Scottish lodge of Freemasons at a table in his low room cloudy
the Kosóy meadow nor the Dëmkin hill, and heaven only knows what it
feet scampered merrily and quickly across the meadow grass.
He was evidently suffering both physically and mentally. There was no
while he began making happy plans for the future. He decided that he

“Do you hear?” he asked. Pétya recognized the sound of Russian voices
And Prince Andrew, with others fatally wounded, was left to the care of

madman who did not know what he was doing.”
boldly and hurriedly, in a husky but melodious bass voice.
what was needed to run such a salon, or because those who were deceived
therefore there can be no such thing as a military genius—now appeared
round an open window. Three others were romping with a young bear, one
The cold, austere tone of this man, whom he had almost always before met

“Ho! ho! ho! Ha! ha! ha! ha! Ouh! ouh!” came peals of such healthy
case will not have a family.


waiting for the beat. Only on horse back and in the mazurka was

coldly and vindictively. “Did you see her?” she added, after a pause.
“The general on duty, quick! It’s very important!” said he to someone


been ready, but they still delayed and all were silent.

“Don’t talk Russian,” said Dólokhov in a hurried whisper, and at that
Princess Mary listened attentively to what he told her.
uniform living waves of soldiers, shoulder straps, covered shakos,
“Well, adorer and courtier of the Emperor Alexander, why don’t you say
you won’t require it. We’ll go into the accounts later.”
and after his sick father had had to flee to Moscow, abandoning to
distinguish something at a distance. At present he still forgot what was
make them look at the wag.
returned, and over the bottle of wine conversation between the three
somehow grown so clean, smooth, and fresh—as if he had just come out of

trifles, you are welcome to anything—we shall be delighted! Pray!...
As when a window is opened a whiff of fresh air from the fields enters
city. Pierre had warned his brother-in-law that Prince Andrew was on
heart with his love. At the gate stood Gerásim, the cook, and two
white trunk and branches, and above it shone the moon, nearly at its
She smiled as she uttered his pet name, “Andrúsha.” It was
army? The Emperor Alexander, not I! And you offer me negotiations when I
wish to let the mistress leave the estate, and threaten to unharness her
“And can’t it be helped?” she asked. Prince Andrew did not reply,
There was nothing left for them to do but cry “Vive l’Empereur!” and go

confidence, flatter him, become intimate with him, and finally make his
“How is it I am not moving? I have fallen, I am killed!” Rostóv
greatest number of monuments have remained: kings, ministers, generals,
muttering the prayer at Communion: “Let the bold and insolent
disgust of that Natásha who had just passed him in the ballroom with
“You are Count Ilyá Rostóv’s son? My wife was a great friend of your
circumstances changed and the news he brought was already becoming
promise of rising in his diplomatic career. He was still a young man but
they seemed of them, one could feel by the occasional glances they gave
and she, smiling and shaking a finger at Hippolyte, invited Prince
so the worse the condition it was in, the better pleased the commander
“I have begun giving the elder ones marks every evening, showing how
return to her the whole evening.

were raised to the count.
“Pick him up, lift him, it’s all the same!” cried someone.
With a solemn triumphal march there mingled a song, the drip from the

“You have no heart, you don’t feel for your own child! Another man would
“I’ll let two more letters pass, but the third I’ll read,” said
and at him, about some pair of boots he had thrown into the bushes.
anything that went on that evening. They danced the écossaise and the

energetically than anyone, led the guests into the drawing room, and
“Because he is young, because he is poor, because he is a relation...
she might to hide it, and perturbed as she evidently was each time her
noticed that the wheels do not supply an explanation and has taken the
this was not so but that on the contrary the French had run away. He


anterooms of many important men, and the different types of such rooms
“You are wounded?” he asked, hardly able to master the trembling of
The men became silent. The soldier who had been struck groaned and wiped
and my father was much affected by it. He says the count was the last
congratulations and happy faces, announcing the trophies taken, the
near everything grew brighter, more joyful, more significant, and more
smooth again.

“Captain Túshin’s, your excellency!” shouted the red-haired,

him here?”

he reports that our losses were great, it is not true; perhaps about
because while an adjutant was riding more than a mile to Napoleon
The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly that
search of somebody and answered all her questions in monosyllables. He
aides-de-camp at Bennigsen’s country house.
visitor. “He is a son of Márya Ivánovna Dólokhova, such a worthy


Within four years he had paid off all his remaining debts without
latter. Many other orators spoke after the excited nobleman, and all in


have proceeded to fight the Russians because it was inevitable.
for us.
attention. Dohktúrov, a little man, sat opposite Weyrother, with
that the momentous event was accomplished that will always remain the
“You are friendly with Borís, aren’t you?” asked Véra.
master’s house. Come in,” said Mávra Kuzmínichna. “Is he very ill?” she

says, ‘go up to ours and they are all rotten and maggoty. So,’ he says,
Denísov could not speak and gasped for breath. When Rostóv asked what
of natural forces; they anticipate war between their sovereigns; the
unpleasant things to everyone and upset them. Let’s go to the
had doubts about this marriage.
“Allow me, Miss! I can’t do it like that,” said the maid who was
“But this is very important, from General Dokhtúrov,” said
position, it was now necessary to attack in order to cut a way through

individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you
his disheveled gray hair hanging over his flushed, perspiring face.
wait before we rejoice.”
godfather,” she added, as if she attached no importance at all to the

At the moment when Vereshchágin fell and the crowd closed in with savage
Rostóv and most of the officers after the review.
to Rostóv’s face, and his sobs were audible.
esaul drew back. They were so near that they thought they were the cause
“But you can’t have understood me,” said Princess Mary with a sad smile.
French battalion rushes to the bridgehead, spikes the guns, and the
town,” said Pierre, “and that the position...”

up very much.”
Semënovsk—his adjutant came back from him and told Kutúzov that the duke
“I did not notice him following me,” she said timidly. “I just looked
All historians agree that the external activity of states and nations


Pierre heard it plainly, but at that moment he remembered that he

“Whenever will you be ready?” asked the count coming to the door.
that in this world there is neither honor nor justice. In this world one
“That’s not the point. I’m not going to discuss the matter. I do not
Prince Andrew rose hastily, listened to the business they had come

Rostóv from returning home as he had promised and marrying Sónya. The
this life temporarily; but then he was shocked by the thought of how
now to speed and now to stay the enormous, popular tide that bore him
all follow that the march was the cause of it.
foot to foot uncertain with which to start, then settled down, galloped
instructions to hand it to the Governor and to come back as quickly as
CHAPTER I
somewhere below his throat rushed to his face and eyes. He could not

conclusion from all that had been said. Prince Andrew, listening to this


just returned from Vienna, two diplomatists, the old aunt, a young man
hostile to Napoleon, which had been sent to all the European courts.
expression of quiet solemnity.
Language: English
And Pierre, his voice trembling continually, went on to tell of the last
mismanaged his wife’s property and was to blame toward his children,
he’s made off.”
Pierre went on with his diary, and this is what he wrote in it during

gave it, losing a quarter of his army and lengthening his lines of

everything before you, everything. And you....”
“I? It was last Sunday they took me, out of a hospital in Moscow.”
stay like that then, I won’t touch you. But listen. I won’t tell you how
the old man. He appeared to address condescending words to him from
that the Corsican monster who is destroying the peace of Europe may
the troops forward according to his own ideas without mentioning the
had broken up the French troops.
appeared to him in a dream: his mother and her large white hand,
things. “These aren’t needed,” said she, putting aside some plates
they had lifted the dying man and were moving him.
the other from Sónya. He recognized them by the handwriting and opened
    CHAPTER XXXI
weight they were carrying were too much for them.
“Yes, yes,” assented Pierre.
room. The old countess, waiting for the return of her husband and son,

Rostóv, who had completely forgotten Denísov, not wishing anyone to
“Oh, how oppressive this continual delirium is,” thought Prince Andrew,
word Empereur. By omitting the e, though incorrectly, Pierre got the

plight of the French or because of it, they wished to punish the floor

be best described as strength of will. Pierre was always astonished at
transformed.
but Borís... No!” (She shut her eyes.) “No! there’s nothing at
and then interrupted him. Princess Mary came out to meet Pierre. She
smashed, and the shouting grew louder. They drank to Bekleshëv,
galloping along the courtyard, but instead of holding the reins he waved

Sventsyáni, because on the first day of their arrival at that small town
boldly, “if you wish to refuse one who is not only a brilliant and
you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works even without
one do without government? Or else there would be plenty who’d rob us.”
father and of Prince Andrew. Involuntarily she thought their thoughts

as he always did when at the front, solemn and stern. Then came the word
Pétya wished to say “Good night” but could not utter a word. The
its upper lip covered with tiny black hair.
important. What is important are the rights of man, emancipation from
late count—the kingdom of heaven be his!—and we have lived under you
Nothing Pétya could have seen now would have surprised him. He was in a
“It must be one of ours, a prisoner. Yes. Can it be that they will
on, his eyes fixed on the conqueror whose fame had reached him across
The silence began to oppress the princess and she tried to catch

decently here,” continued Telyánin. “Now then, let me have it.”
between ourselves, was very far gone in the land of tenderness...”
At the first sound of trampling hoofs and shouting, Pétya lashed his
Borís to tell them about his journey to Glogau and in what state he
“That peasant near Mozháysk where the battle was said the men were all
Russians still holding their ground—a terrible feeling like a nightmare
false. He was happy to be seeing him. He knew that he might and even
sad, very sad. But remember, my dear fellow, that I am a father to you,
three services in their own house, but as Agraféna Ivánovna did, by
even more so. I like being alone.... Father likes her very much. She and

and I won’t allow it to be said!”
“I am very, very grateful to you,” she said in French, “but I hope it
dressed for his attendance at court in full parade uniform, which he


wished to do something special on meeting his friend. He wanted to pinch
Moscow during the holidays to amuse himself. Nicholas guessed what his
mile and a half away, but had suddenly and unexpectedly appeared just in
polyglot talk and to these surmises, plans, refutations, and shouts,
taken her, or else where can she be?” he added.
more confident was the appearance of our troops. The soldiers in

Nothing is so necessary for a young man as the society of clever
that the events depended on those commands. But examining the events


The old count, knowing his son’s ardor in the hunt, hurried so as not
trees, your dark branches shed gloom and melancholy upon me.”
them. All the powers of his soul, as of every soldier there, were
unnecessary. They were not in the least abashed. The old woman, lowering
distress at the dead body with its long, thin, half-severed neck and its
attention. Napoleon apparently remembered seeing him on the battlefield
seduced, and to whom her poor mother (sa pauvre mère) appeared, and

“Sire, the prince...” began the adjutant.
smile, for which he was long unable to forgive himself, “I have lost a

to smile but could not: his smile expressed suffering, and he silently
CHAPTER XV
rendering the execution of the last command possible.
animation and apprehension, but it seemed to Pierre that the cause of
it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
The offer was too tempting to be refused. Everyone volunteered to go and
of hers seemed to be the only serious and real society. Natásha saw by
“But, dear me, that must be a fraud!” said Pierre, naïvely, who had
well and have the greatest respect for them.”
from worldliness, but not avoid (a) the service of the state, (b) family

she knew so well), on the lock of gray hair that escaped from under the
The distinction between the poor teachings of mundane science and our

impossible to defer the journey to Moscow any longer. Natásha’s
its broad temples and close-cropped hair, and looked at Bezúkhov. The
without knowing why. War is not courtesy but the most horrible thing in
that he is unable to work his charms) because the business of their
words clearly did not correspond to his thoughts):
ran forward on each such occasion, fearing to miss a single word of the
To please you...” said Prince Andrew. But immediately, noticing

downstairs to his own room. A quarter of an hour later the old count

at the very moment when the Emperor, having alighted from the sleigh,
distances from the town as to protect the carts. (4) Similar measures
Sónya came along, wrapped in her cloak. She was only a couple of paces
the army unless he is a general!” said Napoleon, evidently uttering
big beards as soon as they are of age and go on unchanged till they
looked round to see where the smell came from. Next he thought of that


humanity’s essential question, serve as currency for some purposes of


brought them to his quarters, placed them in his own lodging, and
said “Uncle” sternly.
general were talking in low voices and Kutúzov smiled slightly as
with him. What does that mean? Does it mean that it’s the real thing?
do the doctors say?” asked the princess after a pause, her worn face
the bank of the Drissa. As there was not a single town or large


be proud of it! And on my honor, in spite of the cough I caught there, I
back at the place where the shot had been fired and the dog was howling,
“That is life,” said the old teacher.
I don’t say that we ought to oppose this and that. We may be mistaken.
the condition in which she had found Prince Andrew. But Pierre’s face
Berg. “This is what comes of knowing how to conduct oneself.”
she, poor thing, has no one to help her, and they do cheat her so!”
toward me? What do you think? What do you think?”
He embraced her. She screamed and fell unconscious on his shoulder.
among them. On my word I’d give five years of my life for it!”


wrapped her up in it.

eyes fixed on the dark face of a large icon of the Saviour lit by a
be worthy of her. And that is what we shall see.”

lost only a quarter of their men and still had their Guards intact,
the Whole,” said Pierre, and he pointed to the sky.

had foreseen. Prince Andrew, out of breath with his rapid ride, spoke

a bent sheet of iron on the steps in the “reception room”—as
God, in the creation of the firmament, and in the miracle of Joshua the



marshals, nor was there any need of that special and supreme quality
tried to hurry, but his legs refused to move and he knew he would not be


man is the count’s son,” she added more softly. “What a terrible
your interests as with a kinswoman, a good, kind, true relation. And I
to Moscow it was necessary: (1) that they should form themselves into
for her intervention.
A general with a brilliant suite galloped off at once to fetch the
“Oh, very interesting!” said Mademoiselle Bourienne.

to hold herself with particular dignity, and always spoke rapturously
“Write and tell your brother to wait till I am dead.... It won’t be
Sometimes it occurred to Natásha that he did not wish to see her, and
On October 11, the day when all was astir at headquarters over the news

“And how does one do it in a barn?” inquired Sónya.
Daniel did not answer, but winked instead.
crossing his legs and glancing round.
come directly,” Pierre replied to the major-domo.
their bayonets and guns.
History (or what is called by that name) replying to these questions
paid first, and those who like Mítenka held promissory notes given them
her his view of the matter at a small and intimate gathering.



saw that the sick and wounded were lying on the floor on straw and
“Go, ma’am! Don’t worry, go!” she whispered, smiling, with the kind of
dragged home with him, and Berg who spent whole days at the Rostóvs’
“Yes, yes,” she said, answering something quite different. “I too should
quartermaster’s presence.
himself up, slightly arching his back. It was plain that the commander
The regimental commander, flushing, ran to his horse, seized the stirrup

was sitting at a small table, chattering with Másha, her maid. She grew
“I do not dispute that, but it cannot be denied that court privileges
“Bad! Bad!” exclaimed Pierre. “We all know what is bad for
of the crowd Pétya had seen in the Square, there was a striking
“Do you know her? She’s thin, with long teeth,” said Pierre.
rights of man, is sentenced to...” But before Pierre—who at that
arm. He began to laugh.
the more obvious it becomes, that the ultimate purpose is beyond our

nursery.”

“I say, Berg, my dear fellow,” said Rostóv, “when you get a

Serene Highness. He knew Kutúzov’s attention would be caught by those

of unheard-of losses, of the loss of half the army, and a fresh battle


of the lean sinewy hand, showed that the prince still possessed the
my hands. Scarcely had I torn it off before another, a bigger one, began

mind’s eye the estate as a whole and not any particular part of it. The
by two hussars. The officer, the soldiers, and their horses all looked

troubled the French. They imagined it to be a call to arms. A few
window the moans of the adjutant could be heard more distinctly. She put
swayed by the breeze. Everything was in blossom, the nightingales
   Courage conquest guarantees;
love.
Dólokhov.
it would never have entered her mind to think her position hard; but
the old prince first heard of the defeat at Austerlitz stated, as usual
with lice, curled round his head like a cap. The look of his eyes
civilization, culture, ideas, are all indistinct, indefinite conceptions
mischief-makers don’t meddle even a German beats Buonaparte. He is
voice, with its incorrect breathing and labored transitions, was
was the name his fancy gave to the farthest gun of the battery, which
Countess Bezúkhova’s box and something told her it was Kurágin. She
he shrank before the transport of groundless wrath that had evidently
she bowed very low and made the sign of the cross, saying to herself
he feels sure he will distinguish himself. He was glancing at everyone
hot. Pierre, however, felt excited, and the general desire to show that
horses and the infantry collecting wood.
as a mark of their gratitude for the benefits he had conferred on them,
“Oh, Heaven! How ill he is!” exclaimed the mother.
peace.” But however much they left her in peace she could not now be
cousin.
could tell them nothing definite about the troops in that column.
herself or of her own relations with Prince Andrew.

schoolboy called up before a large audience for an examination in which
forgot it.
whirled round it at full speed with her dress puffed out like a balloon,
or weeping over its downfall. The tales and descriptions of that time
Pierre took off his spectacles, which made his face seem different and
you at last decided on anything? Are you going to be a guardsman or a
hurrying past them.
himself—who were all vigorously opposed to her nursing her baby herself,
orders to admit no more, but the porter was told to be sure to invite to
anything and asks me, he won’t get a refusal. When one has studied, you
“I love you all, and have done no harm to anyone; and what have you
already seen the young master, and, before he had reached the drawing
We knew you’d say so. But it won’t do, because you see, if you say
“You absolutely must come and see me,” she said in a tone that
so smooth and regular.
much that was painful and difficult awaited them on this journey.

leave me alone with him!”
to Dresden, could not help having his head turned by the homage he
situation of Moscow, and military questions generally. Though they had

an agitated and serious face. As soon as he saw Natásha his face
past too and to understand a side of life previously incomprehensible to
and kindly people. The old count’s hospitality and good nature, which
Márya Dmítrievna went on admonishing her for some time, enjoining on her
conditions exists—the facts of history almost always contradict that
could place her in such an embarrassing position and had spent half an
cannon aimed at me?”
Prince Vasíli and the generals, had the benefit of the diplomat.
young man, because he was at home, because he had left Bélaya Tsérkov
views by this French sentence. “C’est bien pour un garçon de rien
that between the person they so address and themselves there are some
dream of Princess Mary was always difficult and a little frightening.
(This Frenchman and one of the German princes serving with the Russian
this victory to the Austrian court, now no longer at Vienna (which was
have tried to put them somewhere under cover,” Nicholas continued

be done; he felt that everybody, including his mother and sisters, was
I’ll come for you.”
“You are joking,” replied Pierre, growing more and more excited.

expression, evidently habitual to him when conversing with women.
smoke. The excited faces of the soldiers were blackened with it. Some
alert than he had done the day before. Only his eyes gleamed feverishly
The Mason did not move and for a long time said nothing after this

Only I am sorry for my old wife and the children,’ and the old man began

saying.

crossed the road, and began riding up the hill at a gallop toward the
Heaven only knows who arranged all this and when, but it all got done

the ship to move, such a delusion is no longer possible. The ship moves


idea never occurred to any of them that they could not know the disease
“Lower its head, lower it!” he said to a soldier who had accidentally
himself, and at once without any effort saw in everyone he met
“Yes, and yet he is quite different. They say men are friends when they
In the first place the marriage was not a brilliant one as regards

in this world and never known anything so disgraceful!”
themselves to Túshin in all their horror. He had been so excited that

usual, in their spare time, they lit bonfires, steamed themselves before
“One should make up to the husbands of pretty women,” said Denísov.

father...”

possibility did not exist. It was impossible not to retreat a day’s


disconcerted. The sight of the discomposure of that old man of the world
spoke of their future life. Prince Andrew was afraid and ashamed to
and little tables. During balls given at the house Pierre, who did not
Malvíntseva had evidently not liked, and having asked what Nicholas
“Wostóv! Pétya!” exclaimed Denísov, having run through the dispatch.
personally in order to find a fresh pretext for a duel. But he again
BOOK FIFTEEN: 1812 - 13


In the Emperor’s suite all exchanged rapid looks that expressed

Denísov, Natásha, her three children, their governess, and old Michael
Nicholas Rostóv meanwhile remained at his post, waiting for the wolf.
make out something of what he is saying. His head is clearer. Come in,

“What? What’s that?” asked Anna Pávlovna, securing silence for the mot,

Archduke, inspected the allied army of eighty thousand men.

blissful feeling such as he had not experienced for a long time. All the
My Lady, but the well-known song: Came a maiden down the street. The
prince’s question as to how she felt.
appear to us more under compulsion and less free the more correctly we
you staying in my house?”

officers again demanded action. Generals on the staff, excited by the

man and help him to worldly success. Under cover of obtaining help

Sónya, feeling unusually excited and touched, remained at the window
news and common acquaintances like people who do not know each other
abruptly.

Just as in the mechanism of a clock, so in the mechanism of the military
voice. When Pierre saw the Emperor he was coming out accompanied by two

everything she did in his presence and, looking up at him gratefully,
“Goodness gracious! See her knife?...”
After Denísov’s departure, Rostóv spent another fortnight in Moscow,
emotions associated with that feeling.
been for his thin, compressed, twitching lips and dull, gloomy, fixed
which was talked of in the town, and was it true? Pierre laughed and
still be told the same. All the way she had sat motionless in a corner
presenting an envelope.
innocent to have the strength to perform all a mother’s duties. As a
but for an instant. Not only do we know this ourselves, but Christ, the

for their guests’ arrival.
campfire was blazing brightly in the midst of the snow, lighting up the
Pierre, began talking of love and of his love affairs.
weather, and Countess Apráksina. Now and then they glanced at one
in to meet the visitors, treading heavily, and vainly trying to appear
from her neck the necklace the young Armenian was wearing, and the young
will be. I am in attendance on him, you know; I’ll mention it to him.
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER X
How bright and glorious was the setting sun! With what soft glitter the
“The Emperor Alexander,” said she, with the melancholy which
capable of receiving it.
purple-faced general wait respectfully while Captain Prince Andrew, for
could get to know one another. Malvíntseva expressed approval, and the
man who was making him angry. But he did forget himself once or twice
opinion which had that day originated among the higher French officers,
so jaded that at a meeting of the huntsmen it was decided to give them
cold expression.
“Did your mother tell you that it cannot be for a year?” asked
higher than that life and truth there is no life or truth!”
narration of episodes in the lives of individuals, it too, setting
pointing to the flying soldiers; but at that instant, as if to punish
“Please, Andrew, for my sake!...”
purely external and fictitious.
as were all the words he spoke that day, and Count Ilyá looked joyfully
population plainly that the town would be abandoned.

front, leaning on a stick and slightly limping. When he had advanced
never was much to my liking. Of course he is an excellent man, but


Prince Vasíli had come to the conclusion that it was necessary to throw

who was prepared to wait awhile for an answer, Pierre felt that every
given to raise recruits, ten men in every thousand for the regular army,
time till they came to Moscow had not left them for a day.
a third, Count Arakchéev, if his nerves were not too weak.”

were either more or less than 666. Once when making such calculations he

wrapped his loose cloak closer and rubbed one bare foot with the other.

She was right,” he thought, remembering what the governor’s wife had
Kutúzov looked at Rostopchín as if, not grasping what was said to him,
been taken out of the cases, they recommenced packing, and it turned


“Idiot!” she screamed at her brother and, running to a chair, threw
possible, forget the misfortunes you have suffered, should entertain
prison, and had a mother who could not see or understand it? And
what was asked. All that would be interesting if we recognized a divine

Natásha got up and Nicholas sat down at the clavichord. Standing
commander, but now that the commander in chief addressed him he drew
It is natural for us who were not living in those days to imagine that

Hendríkhovna blushed till her eyes filled with tears and thereby became

and palpable a blunder.

handwriting. On receiving it, he ran on tiptoe to his study in alarm and
to live this earthly life. And the more imbued he became with that

Princess Mary went up and kissed his hand. His left hand pressed hers
soft, confidential voice, as though afraid of being overheard.
Pierre looked silently and inquiringly at him over his spectacles.
Denísov patted him on the shoulder and began rapidly pacing the room

she was bewitching and that he loved her. During the écossaise, which
white one, the white one!”
people despise in their own class and do not understand from those in


made no kind of deduction from or application of them. He replied to
CHAPTER II
good natured playfulness.
just saying so myself,” though a moment before he had said quite the

will come out that you’re already married. Why, they’ll have you in
would pass that way. Halfway lay some snow-covered piles of firewood and
was attained in the first place of itself, as the French ran away,
and wiping their faces with their cambric handkerchiefs.
Arakchéev, or Prince Volkónski, or was given this or that advice and did
were sitting on some feather beds. Evidently these fugitives were
Russian!”
Dólokhov pressed Rostóv’s hand and burst into tears.
honored guests sat, everyone seemed to be in high spirits and under the

“Why is it true?” Natásha asked, looking attentively into Pierre’s eyes.

his will, very variously and indefinitely directed. Amid a long series
was said to him, the German submitted and took his men elsewhere. The
wife and you marry Nicholas!”
killing my children and yours, and Arakchéev from sending me off to some
love her.
our friends and poor. Well then, this!” and he tore up the note, and
“What a strange fate, Másha darling!” And having taken off his
When some larger concourse of men direct their activity to a common aim
“Oh, I’ll go and see,” said Pierre, jumping up. “You know,” he added,
father and instantly dropped again. Natásha was happier than she had
their enormous mass drew the individual human atoms to itself. In their
“What has happened?” asked Nicholas.
much better than warfare. If the aim was the progress of civilization,
feared lest the confusion she felt might overwhelm her and betray her as
supplies of all kinds to two appointed markets, of which one is on
enemy drew near the wealthy classes went away abandoning their property,
stooping low, entered the battery to carry away the wounded man.
returned to the house convinced that Moscow would not be defended, he
heroism!”

liked to help young men, was flattered by being asked for his assistance
too, with his wife. He ran away from her and she came galloping after

fairy kingdom where everything was possible.
where the oak is, but now we have withdrawn our left wing—now it is over
soul, and for that very reason had understood and assimilated the one

He could not see an aim, for he now had faith—not faith in any kind of
intemperance, and his mouth twitched nervously. The general looked the
“Capital!” said Prince Hippolyte in English, and began slapping his
little horse.
white ruffle, outlining his rather long face which was lit up from
“I? What have I...?” stammered Pierre.
attention of all to Borís’ narrative was shown by Hélène. She asked

BOOK FOURTEEN: 1812
On seeing the crowd and the bloodstained man the workman ceased
missed several chances of forcing an engagement. In August he was at
Historical science in its endeavor to draw nearer to truth continually
CHAPTER XIX
“And so they are writing from Potsdam already?” he said, repeating
opportunity to air it. It was one of the millions of proposals, one as
with him, trying to speak significantly. He referred to the fact that

that was not what made her unrecognizable; she was unrecognizable at the
He wrote from the province of Vorónezh where he had been sent to procure
Russian arms.
chill ran down his back. Again he glanced at the ranks. Probably many
with. Having glanced at Dron he at once understood that his answers did

     sacred city of Alexander’s people, Moscow with its

“Can one be well while suffering morally? Can one be calm in times
but...”
for something, for some quality, for some purpose, or for some reason,
said he, bending down a finger.
his Plutarch, were leading a huge army. The army was made up of white
“What you have with you: watch, money, rings....”
“Sire!” said Michaud with a subtle, scarcely perceptible smile on his
At eleven o’clock they brought him news that the flèches captured by the
He finished and, getting up, embraced and kissed Pierre, who, with tears
Alpátych, without answering or looking at his host, sorted his packages
eyes.
stopped in front of Balashëv. Balashëv noticed that his left leg was
CHAPTER XIII
cruelty...”
gentleman-in-waiting.
Véra sufficiently and of being so ready to get her off their hands. The
While disputes and intrigues were going on about the future field of
has been degraded, you know. Now he wants to bob up again. He’s been
    CHAPTER XXIII
Thanks to Anna Mikháylovna’s efforts, his own tastes, and the
alone, but because of everyone, it must inevitably come about. They are
regiment, saying he was not such a fool as to slave at the front when he
and wished to say something. But what it was, no one could tell: it
thunder, and he looked round. There was some smoke, and the Frenchmen
Dolgorúkov, looking round at Bilíbin with a smile.
in the shadow at the other side of the fire.
“I agreed,” Natásha now said to herself, “that it would be dreadful if
their thick, bushy eyebrows sternly scanned all present and rested on
voice not his own, gripping Karp by the collar. “Bind him, bind him!” he
to side till Anatole’s face showed a sufficient degree of terror.
“Well then,” continued Prince Andrew to Alpátych, “report to them as I
“Fool, I told you the sable one! Hey, Matrëna, the sable!” he shouted so
“Véra,” she said to her eldest daughter who was evidently not a
nothing to encourage Zdrzhinski’s enthusiasm but, on the contrary,

In a side street near the crossroads where the vehicles had stopped, a
stuck in his girdle. When he espied Denísov he hastily threw something
always high-pitched, mournful, delicate, and almost feminine, and his
merrily, and inquisitively at him. And Prince Andrew, crossing his
aims, and feels with his whole being that he can now do or abstain from


You should not think so.”
through the same sufferings...”



the enemy will not soon attack him. Forty-eight guns with ammunition
expressing the thoughts that had suddenly occurred to him.

Attempted drives from east to west—similar to the contrary movements of


standing on the pasture by the barn.

“Yes, but he will dislike it extremely,” said Bolkónski.
“The enemy is still far away, your excellency. According to the
An infantry regiment which had left Tarútino three thousand strong but

raising his soft foot backwards, bowing his perspiring head, smiling
had kept him, and Prince Andrew noticed this affectation of modesty.
“What is the commander in chief doing here?” he asked.
he uttered the word Poltáva before Caulaincourt began speaking of the
Dólokhov’s hand.
his imaginary sword, but smiling at the remembrance of that pleasant,
settled. He came because of Sónya. And Sónya, though she would never
fought and where the obvious disintegration of the French army began;
The game continued; a waiter kept handing round champagne.
The militiamen with stretchers who were called up stood behind the
Natásha betook herself to the ballroom, picked up her guitar, sat down
to twitch. The twitching increased, the handsome mouth was drawn to one
when his aid is required and a quiet onlooker when not called on to
mistresses and such and such ministers and he ruled France badly. His
bows and trying to escape as quickly as possible from the glances fixed

It was two o’clock in the afternoon. The French had already entered
“He is no more....”
was trying to fit music:
distinct, precise, enticingly rhythmical strains of a waltz. The Emperor
“And so you have met Count Nicholas, Mary?” Prince Andrew suddenly said,
Minister of War, Count Arakchéev.

Princess Mary again shook her head disapprovingly.
little gold icon Princess Mary had hung round her brother’s neck, but
how could he speak like that in her presence? The only explanation was
hanging lifelessly just in the pose she used to stand in when she
“Karáy, ulyulyu!...” he shouted, looking round for the old borzoi

were children. You might think that I... I understand, quite understand.
self-reproach, and hopes reawoke.
at home again. He felt that he had grown up and matured very much. His
mist and taking it for a tree can again take it for a tree after he has
Had he repented of his unbelief? Was he now there? There in the realms

“And if you put up at my house that will be better still. That’s it,
The crowd halted, pressing around those who had heard what the

the landing. “I’d better go to my own room.”


army.
health was drunk, Pierre, lost in thought, did not rise or lift his
desperate weeping of a woman close to him. He stopped as if awakening
out there... both playing the hero... Ah, Vasíli Ignátovich...

on them all. He thought that, as in Africa he had to put on a burnoose
“Nikólenka... a letter... wa... a... s... wounded... my darling
could carry no weight—“I give you my word of honor that I have five
dear. We will see how Tarás distinguishes himself today. He says Count
before the icons that had been left here and there hanging on the wall.
and held out her hand with a glance of gentle inquiry. Mademoiselle
But as she passed the sitting room she noticed two couples sitting,
“Never mind, never mind, what does it matter? For one day we can move
feeling a joyous sense of her love for him. Remembering her friendly
of all, who was a comrade. The canteenkeeper gave one credit, one’s
overcoats.
If in the descriptions given by historians, especially French ones, we

staring at her. She was pleased to see that he was captivated by her and

for which I am ready to die.”
“Natalie?” he whispered inquiringly while she felt her hands being
the streets. Do not be upset, brothers, that the law courts are closed;
dispositions, it was written—though not in German this time:
“Nicholas! Get up!” Natásha’s voice was again heard at the door.
“Oh, no, not at all,” said Borís. “But if you are tired, come and

at Prince Andrew, and, evidently not recognizing him, moved with his
Nesvítski was there as an old member of the club. Pierre, who at his
change in the expression of his fixed eyes, watched the regimental


terrible stormcloud he had desired with the whole strength of his soul
“Why joke?” said the driver, laughing. “As if I’d grudge my
by him, they offer him to you as they would a dish of choice sterlet.
blue-gray dog, with a long body and short bandy legs, that jumped about

“What’s that? What do you make of it?” said Rostóv to the hussar


you, my friend, are missing...” and so on.
fixed straight on his son’s. Something twitched in the lower part of
bestowed on Véra by Nicholas, was considered very stinging), “and
and pressed him against the railings, and all he could do was to smile.
he had something more to say, or waiting to see if Pierre would say
“How am I?” Dólokhov answered coldly. “I am as you see.”
be to blame if, without ever speaking of it to anyone, she continued to
without doffing their caps. Two tall old peasants with wrinkled faces
“Who is your Elder here? Hey?” shouted Rostóv, coming up to the crowd
command. “Sergeants major!... How soon will he be here?” he asked

Achilles could never catch up with a tortoise he was following, in spite
with head erect, looking at something over the heads of the ladies.
know God and hate your life. There is nothing strange in that, my dear
him, from his weary, bored expression to his quiet, measured step,

oneself to God, whom she felt guiding her soul at those moments. She
CHAPTER II
them—the French stumbled upon Nevérovski’s division and reached the
intention should he try to direct his whole force against our faithful
lips, and hurried away.
at Kutúzov’s.
sound of officers’ voices in eager conversation.
“To Mozháysk.”

deliberating,” continued Napoleon with the same derisive and
be distributed to those who had been burned out. But as food was too
Seven days had passed since Prince Andrew found himself in the
and the buying of expensive seed corn, and did not make a hobby of any
While Pierre, standing in the middle of the room, was talking to himself
touching thanks of deputations of serfs in their full-skirted blue
the cause of his grief.


But he scowled at her angrily though also with suffering in his eyes,
Kutúzov a garrison report and the keys of the town. The contemptuously
and to the city entrusted to him, and of himself—not himself as Theodore
that he thought he remembered that some other fellow had got mixed up

Natásha, she saw the terrible moral symptoms which to her were more
complete necessity.
mustaches and whiskers rode up to the gate and, glancing at Prince
“We were ordered to be at the place before nine, but we haven’t got


another pie but felt shy, and therefore pretended to be examining the
something.”
one finger, “then I have nothing to answer for; but if it is valid, no
accent.
fall of the first man, resulting in the production of the human race,
and artillerymen’s bonfires. To the left, not far from the farthest
having ordered the infantry supports behind the battery to lie down,
Murat was informed that the way had been cleared. The French entered
he immediately dispatched Adjutant General Wintzingerode, who was in
got there he leaned on his elbows and, smiling, talked to her for a long
without eating.”
but attacked and captured by a superior enemy force as a result of one

“Leave it,” said Dólokhov, though he did not seem to be even
The consciousness that this would be so and would always be so was and
princess’ hair. It was evident that he could be silent in this way for

made preparations for the journey to Moscow.
impossible to describe the movement of humanity without the conception

Mamma had long been thinking of it; but I had never happened to meet her
impossible to prevent it. Three regiments have been here and spent
“My father, to whom I have told my plans, has made it an express

know, and this alarmed and tormented her.
some!”
that had passed between them had been long forgotten and could never in
And Rostóv got up and went wandering among the campfires, dreaming of

merely lying low, the hunter did not know. Suddenly the beast was heard

“God Almighty alone can decide the fate of our fatherland, Papa,” said
Princess Mary understood his story and sympathized with him, but she
was associated in her mind with the ruin of Russia. She was agitated and
Anna Mikháylovna instantly guessed her intention and stooped to be
stories of his kindness and irascibility. Berg, as usual, kept silent
whole fortified camp and, by the aid of his own knowledge and by
you wouldn’t have room to turn round there. If you must go, go to the
with an audience.

Princess Mary still more. After five minutes of irksome, constrained
must ride up.... Shall we both course it?” answered Nicholas, seeing

insignificant in comparison with eternity; again the question: for what?


French colonel who had been taken prisoner by our dragoons. Our officers
recognizing him as a gentleman, they all avoided him, more especially as
sacrifice my feelings and my honor for money? I wonder how Mamma could
coming out of a gate close by.
strange as it might seem, she must go on a pilgrimage. She disclosed
seemed to him like ants. In that world, the handsome drunkard Number One
the institutions of state and church are erected.
else, but it took too long to dissolve, so it was decided that Mary
understood the Revolution and quelled it, and so for the general good,
in general, food for the men. The younger ones occupied themselves as
also talking in low tones and wearing ball dresses. The mirrors on the
evening. (This was the battle of Shevárdino.) He was told that there in
some prank from her and did not wish to obey her; but she resolutely
but at the moment of trial, without asking what rules others have
“Michael Feoklítych,” said he to the esaul, “this is again fwom that
to him but obey him like a corporal, though I am his senior. This is

“No, I saw... At first there was nothing, then I saw him lying
which he had just been speaking. She thought he was speaking of Russia,
horses were. This difficulty had arisen chiefly because the hussars did

rose, walked to and fro, put on a warm overcoat and a hat, and went
In the Emperors’ suite were the picked young orderly officers of the

Natásha’s face had told her. She did not speak any more to Natásha of
Pierre looked intently at her.
will and partly of the law of inevitability.
“Fr... fr...” snorted Prince Bolkónski. “The prince is making a
and fought for the water and drank it down to the mud.

fight now.

nobility and gentry, that they would furnish ten men, fully equipped,
From the time he received this news to the end of the campaign all
officers became animated. The Guardsmen told Rostóv of their march and
often laughed at him, now said, with a common feeling of self-reproach
“I came at His Majesty the Emperor’s wish to learn from your

followed her. The men went into the study and little Nicholas Bolkónski
In the evening, when Prince Andrew had left, the countess went up to
She felt that from her she would be able to understand and learn


Her throat quivered with convulsive sobs and, afraid of weakening and
gold snuffbox, which he took.

true... He’s lying... Natásha!” she shrieked, pushing those around her
“Yes, yes, call him. A poor little fellow,” Denísov repeated.
Two hours passed. Napoleon had lunched and was again standing in the
the great man’s mercy; the Emperor of Austria considers it a favor that
porch. His landlord, who in a waistcoat and a pointed cap, pitchfork in

being uncorded and the luggage taken out of the carts to make room for
took a great liking to you,” he went on simply and calmly, evidently
“Gave him leave? Leave? That’s just like you young men,” said the

companies, of various sizes and characters. There were some that adopted



with herself, her sufferings, her strivings after goodness, her
bare legs and thin arms, separating from the others, went behind the
His face was terrible and piteous to see, especially from its helpless
“The field marshal is angry with the Emperor and he punishes us all,
the town at the Dorogomílov bridge saw ahead of them masses of soldiers

corridor to the cabinet where the Minister of War was at work. The
sleepy. The punch was finished and there was still nothing to do. He
I think there were not many such gallant sons of the fatherland out
flight was so rapid that the Russian army pursuing the French could
Prince Michael Ilariónovich! Since the twenty-ninth of August I have
devoted himself with passionate enthusiasm to what was to him a new
you? Who found the priest and got the passport? Who raised the money? I
explained how to rivet the hoof and went away to his own quarters.
It’s not true!”
but had now handed it all completely over to his son’s care, being
attempt at familiarity on the part of the Russian messenger.
father’s room, that huge room in which Count Bezúkhov had died.
the last navvy struck it for the last time with his mattock. In historic

life.”

seemed to reign over the town, broken only by the rustle of footsteps,
“No apologies, none whatever,” said Dólokhov to Denísov (who on
To a man not swayed by passion that welfare is never certain, but he
doctor came out with an agitated face and said she could not enter.
that she would not be able to bear it and would burst into sobs in his
always transferred to the men whom we have noticed, it happens that the
“If only some fool would marry her!” Then he slammed the door, sent


expresses his opinion to Kutúzov, to Weyrother, and to the Emperors.
entry of the French into Moscow, during the whole of that agitating,
“Why is it you were never at Annette’s?” the little princess asked
and held back the crowd that was pushing behind them.
“And I should so like to thank Uncle once for all his kindness to me
slipping past him into the Bazaar passage. “Stop, you rascals!”

Denísov smiled, took out of his sabretache a handkerchief that diffused
from them. Lord, help me! My God, if Thy forsaking me is Thy doing, Thy
In all these plottings the subject of intrigue was generally the conduct

drawn. He sought a quiet refuge, and in Joseph Alexéevich’s study he
signs to the footmen, and anxiously glancing from the clock to the door
harm would be done to the inhabitants, and if they remained they would
Sometimes the household both among themselves and in his presence
votre intimité avec ce jeune homme.” *

The Imperial Camp near Mozháysk,
The proportion of freedom to inevitability decreases and increases

repugnance, and closing his eyes quickly fell back on the carriage seat.

Emperor would give another division.

The noncommissioned officer frowned and, muttering words of abuse,
in his large elongated hand on blue paper as follows:
Opinions were divided, and arguments were advanced for and against that
that diminishing, but still considerable, crowd before the palace while
weather, the hounds, and the huntsman that he was being carried away
walls hung round with Persian carpets. The part of the room behind the
power.”
of all she did suddenly set to work too. At first her intervention in
CHAPTER XIII
generally incomprehensible to us, is but a manifestation of His infinite
“Well, Mamma?... Well?...”
spent without taking effect.
sent him a blank sheet of paper in an envelope.
Mytíshchi a mile and a half away, and through the night came the noise
the footlights, and from horns and contrabass came deep notes while many


noticed that they had not come to the front entrance but to the back
Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Bolkónski’s estate, lay forty miles east
sum of them is 666, and that Napoleon was therefore the beast foretold
irresistible persuasiveness.
her bare feet she touched a sleeping man, stepped over him, and opened
nature. Let life go on in it unhindered and let it defend itself, it
commander in chief the buzz of talk ceased and all eyes were fixed on
instinctively felt that the way advised by Túshin and the other
is taught to be ashamed of—even that act finds justification in the
into his calèche and drove back in silence.

frowning and silent.

again pressed Pierre’s hand, and leaned his elbows on the table in a
color; its undulating outline was silhouetted against the horizon and
Napoleon shrugged his shoulders and continued to pace up and down
be thus boldly, provocatively happy.” “And what nonsense all this is


“You can give the message to His Majesty,” said Dolgorúkov,
Bilíbin puckered his skin in preparation for something witty.
brows he glanced into Rostóv’s eyes.
The rapidity of the Russian pursuit was just as destructive to our army
But she still hoped, and asked, in words she herself did not trust:

“And as for the man who advised forming this camp—the Drissa camp,” said
starting from their sockets to watch their chief. On reaching the

fire. From pain, cold, and damp, a feverish shivering shook his whole

and sinfulness?” He paused again. “Who art thou? Thou dreamest that
Lord!” and he wept.
blame. The troops meanwhile stood growing listless and dispirited. After
mirror her eyes full of tears and her mouth quivering, ready to burst
French drummer boy. “Have you had that youngster with you long?” he
“They may die tomorrow; why are they thinking of anything but death?”
Rostóv lay down again on his bed and thought complacently: “Let
especially Bennigsen, who ever since Tarútino had been at daggers
Dimmler the musician and his wife, Vogel the dancing master and his
He saw in him a remarkable, clear-thinking man of vast intellect who by


disordered. The French cannon did not reach there and the musketry fire

Pétya was now a handsome rosy lad of fifteen with full red lips and
thought about this for a long time, and at last made up her mind that,

to Natásha who had come out with him and looked shyly at her with his

more confirmed the farther he rode into the region behind the village of
the inevitable conditions which always limit the activities of any
the general. “In the heat of a battle it is easy to make a mistake. Go
abandonment made an epoch in his life. A novel feeling of anger against
possible power. How does he use it?
who evidently understood his case and wished him nothing but good,
Natásha spent most of the time in her room by herself, sitting huddled

met. Involuntarily he noticed a Georgian or Armenian family
dropped it into a leather pouch attached to the lathe, and, approaching
“Who is to blame for it? Who has let things come to such a pass?” he
for several days she sat in her room dry-eyed, taking no interest in
same fate.
the Apocalypse he did not know, but he did not doubt that connection for
everyone must have personal hopes, Princess Mary in the profoundest
One group of the French stood close to the road, and two of them, one of
raised. The Allies defeated Napoleon, entered Paris, forced Napoleon to
Bennigsen managed everything. Now the decisive moment of battle had come
“There will be room for everybody, this is a big house. Oh, what a

The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table and considered
He smiled and held out his hand to her.


their conversation and quit that corner in the sitting room, but
said, coming from the window and giving Rostóv a large envelope. In
voice saying:
and tongue moved, sounds came, and he began to speak, gazing timidly and
distinguished dignitary and a Swiss who had formerly been tutor at the
wounded and was traveling with their party, she had at first asked many
Anatole was not upset or pained by what she had said.


“So long as a single armed foe remains on Russian soil,” but some
with my wife as he advised, I was not living with her as her husband. To
basis of the sympathy he felt for, and the interest he took in, other
rather round shoulders and glanced at Novosíltsev who was near him, as
thousand times during that half-hour Rostóv cast eager and restless
“Has the enemy entered the city?” he asked.
After giving these and other commands he returned to his tent, and the
saw everyone as in a dream. When I am taken up by a thought, all else is
interested him passionately and exclusively. This was a plan of campaign
When starting on a journey or changing their mode of life, men capable
cold, when half the army perished in a single month—it is of this period
“Well, and that boy?”
They rode at a footpace to the barn, where a large crowd of peasants was
was, nor what was going on before her. As she looked and thought, the
When the twenty minutes had elapsed and the time had come for the old
Smolénsk.
preening its plumage and became motionless.
apparent cause suddenly felt it impossible to go on living as before.
“I think I may congratulate you,” whispered Anna Pávlovna to the
In October, 1805, a Russian army was occupying the villages and towns of
have been any other. To imagine it as free, it is necessary to imagine

man punished who had allowed himself to seize a fox hunted by someone
“There now, Prince! We can’t stop those fellows,” said the staff
never yet mentioned to anyone—all she had lived through during those
very lightly. She went to the table, set down the tray, and with her
smoothing down her dress with an inquiring look at her mother, when
thinking about the strangeness of what had occurred.
“Ah, Princess Mary!” he said suddenly in an unnatural voice,
tell him something. He had a look at all the details of the hunt, sent
restrain those... those... yes, those exploits of antique valor,” he

sacrament. The dying man lay as lifeless and immovable as before. Around
Till the Tsar reached it, each regiment in its silence and immobility
room.... Nicholas had been prepared for resistance, but had not at all
in the way. The senior officer moved with big, rapid strides from one
“You should go, go away at once, if you don’t feel strong enough to
A week later, Pierre, having taken leave of his new friends, the Masons,
said in a tone of indifferent politeness:
position of the troops behind the hill, he quite understood them and

what was happening in the Bald Hills district, where over a radius of
CHAPTER V
several of them were not separated from one another but merged into a
the hill to support the battery. As they took the places vacated by the
round and galloped back to the place where he had seen the Emperor, but

and again jumping up, dashed so impetuously forward that it seemed as if
Prince Andrew (she never mentioned him to her husband, who she imagined
much, my dear sir.”
because at the broken bridge across that river the calamities their army
Next day when Denísov had left Pokróvsk, having quite forgotten about

shoulder and left the room without snuffing the candles or saying why he
“Nicholas!” was all Sónya said, instantly turning white.
And Natásha began rapidly taking out of the case dishes and plates
hands with a passionate movement.



“But you have been misinformed,” said Pierre. “Everything is quiet in

The countess was to wear a claret-colored velvet dress, and the two
Prince Andrew only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre’s childish words.


“Certainly he must be moved onto the bed; here it will be
    CHAPTER VII
concluded, conscious—as were others—after the words were uttered
a horn, with the signal agreed on in case of a fight.
and, making the sign of the cross on his breast, began in a loud and
love someone dear to you with human love, but an enemy can only be loved
Arakchéev looked at the Emperor from under his brow and, sniffing with
“What is the something?” asked he.
brought from Visloúkhovo a hundred rubles in notes (he did not know that
attained.
lips and made a hoarse sound. It was impossible to make out what he
“Your excellency, the Director of the Registrar’s Department has sent
into the water, or when he challenged a man to a duel without any
from the masses around them, the smoke and the increasing fog, to see
themselves and grow more and more miserable.”
in excuse of that gardener would be that he was very angry. But not even
mud-bespattered breeches. The German landlady, hearing Rostóv’s loud
imagine that their children have no secrets from them. “I know I shall
Prince Andrew, still looking into her eyes.
family fortune, and so he could not be angry with him for refusing to

expensive as possible, and gaily and contentedly galloped along the
nearly stormed at Mamma. I will never let anyone say anything bad of
is again, do you hear?” said he, pointing in the direction whence came

captain restored the wife to the husband, saying as he did so: “I have
vewy well—only not for those who get it in the neck. So you are Pwince
either the place they were leaving or that to which they were going.
him. “Remember this, Prince Andrew, if they kill you it will hurt me,

lilac shawl on her head, suggested a delicate exotic plant thrown out



confusion, and cross-purposes, fell into a rage to everybody’s surprise
black woolen gown, her plaited hair negligently twisted into a knot, was
nearly cut our left flank in half were for the moment repulsed. Our

“And let him know that I will do so!” said Napoleon, rising and pushing
“You go to sleep, but I can’t,” said the first voice, coming
out about him.
close, was gazing with astonishment at the angry face of the princess
Natásha kept pulling everyone by sleeve or dress, urging them to
in which the figures of the Emperor and Volkónski could already be

smaller number a less direct share, in the collective action for which

And again all the faces in that crowd bore an identical expression,


“We’ve said good-by. Go!” he suddenly shouted in a loud, angry
some old and evidently precious memory of his “Christian” life, as he
“No, he’s not dead—it’s impossible!” she told herself and approached
paused, looked ironically straight into Balashëv’s eyes, and said in a
full speed. Rostóv, fearing to be crushed or swept into the attack on
paused when I raised it.”
him who was appointed chief of the artillery.
the gunners who had seized it straining to roll it quickly back to its
they quite understood one another as to the first part of their romance,
The few inhabitants who had remained invited commanding officers to
regarded it, had no meaning as a separate thing. It had meaning only as
In the hall she met her father, who had returned with bad news.
“What, teasing again? Go to the devil! Eh?” said Anatole, making a
     the general.”
From the close of the year 1811 intensified arming and concentrating of
having ridden ahead, had pulled up his horse near the bridge, with a
Princess Mary stopped. She was going to say that to speak of love was
she to Count Rostóv who had followed her in. “How can you live in
campfires, or wattle fences to serve for shelter.
the family groups to divide into separate households. He was hard alike
Sónya and fat little Pétya doubled up with laughter.
the part of a doctor who hinders by his medicines—a role he so justly
life, throws down his rapier, and seizing the first cudgel that comes to
“Well then, sell it,” said he. “What’s to be done? I can’t draw back
Pétya, “I consider it so horrid, so abominable, so... I don’t know what.
    CHAPTER XVI
so-and-so.’ He went to the next one. ‘From whom did you get it?’ and so
left during the battle. So it happened that throughout the whole battle
the Rostóvs.

setting fire to Schön Grabern.

forewarned, takes measures accordingly.”
lost and despite the fact that for an army to have to retire after

the evening, heaven knows what might not have happened. But tomorrow we
watching the people who drove past and hurriedly glancing round at
always liable to do of late—“I can only say that if there are any
been so pleased at Olmütz and according to which an ensign might rank
whispered to herself. A smile lit up her face but at the same time she

“Yes, like a man. Everything quite all right, and he began persuading
Napoleon was standing among his troops on the Poklónny Hill looking at
have done so; he continually made the gesture of a man wishing to say
Some forty Uhlans were drowned in the river, though boats were sent to
brightly illuminated stairs between the flowers. Only then did she
“What?” he answered, not recognizing Borís.
thoughts and hopes, contrary to the whole tenor of his life, that unable

noncommissioned officer began talking with his comrades about regimental
Preussisch-Eylau.


toward her, and in their midst several men were supporting by
it...” answered her son coldly. “But I have promised and will do it
wanted to kiss him. Dólokhov kissed him, laughed, turned his horse, and
another day one of the big guerrilla detachments will snatch the prey


life, a thing he rarely did.

quite covered by an apron. On the box beside the driver sat a venerable
in perfect order and readiness for him in his father’s house; he
tricks, Pierre, hearing greetings and the steps of someone who had
in its entirety, but resulted—moment by moment, step by step, event by
Denísov and Pétya rode up to him. From the spot where the peasant was
appeared later, he could not know the course of the battle and not one
recognize in this big, stout man in a peasant coat the vigorous person
Frenchwoman very readily and, looking at her with a smile, talked to her
had grown so dark that one could not distinguish the uniforms ten paces

in Russia, to be placed in this position—made the laughingstock of the
Treasury, cautiously ventured to suggest that Kutúzov would be the man
were in them. She leaned over to her brother and kissed him, slightly
workmen came out the smith, wrenching himself free from the tavern
has, besides abstract reasoning, experience by which he verifies his
things to such a pass that there are no carts or anything!... There it
amputated, he recognized Anatole Kurágin. Men were supporting him in
unworthiness, and in Thy great goodness and Thy many mercies regard not
grant.” Nor did he say to himself: “Pierre is a rich man, I must
those inimitable and unteachable Russian ones that “Uncle” had
“No, why be sorry? Being here, you had to pay your respects. But if he

was. Now he excused himself for having been taken prisoner and now,

After the roast, champagne was served. The guests rose to congratulate
simple note with an order from Kutúzov, and received at night, breaking
negotiations and to offer the Russian army the three days’ truce.
skillful tactics and aims of Napoleon and his army from the time it

“You see, dear man, this is not a sewing shop, and I had no proper
CHAPTER XX
Kutúzov, Count Rostopchín had returned to Moscow mortified and offended
in the Apocalypse. Moreover, by applying the same system to the words
Princess Mary shrugged her shoulders but took the glass submissively

have of hope and strength merely weighs you down and torments you with

“was a political necessity, and it seems to me that Napoleon
Prince Vasíli, who pretended to want to know this in order to settle a
at the door for an instant as if struggling with herself, and then ran

A languor of motion and speech, resulting from weakness, gave her a
Bóry, who had only just entered a regiment of the line and was being

same stillness reigned there, and inside there was the same furniture,
to herself: “No, I must be mistaken, he must be feeling happy, just as
“Heaven only knows what the people here may imagine,” muttered
It was the custom for Mítka to play the balaláyka in the huntsmen’s
fit to be my sister’s companion.”

left him, rubbing his small white hands.
difficulty, “the troops are burning with eagerness...”
then suddenly during a period of fifty years is transferred to the
he thought: “But how strange it is that he should not know that now
It seemed to Daniel irksome and improper to be in a room at all, but to
who appeared at his call. “Hurry off and tell Maksím, the gardener,
This letter touched Nicholas. He had that common sense of a
bare arms and neck were not beautiful—compared to Hélène’s her
to the Emperor shocked Rostóv. Rostóv saw how the Emperor’s rather
the impossibility of changing a man’s convictions by words, and his

him except the young princesses.... They are still young....” She bent
The theory seems irrefutable just because the act of transference of the

Hearing not so much the words as the angry tone of Rostopchín’s voice,
“No, Mamma, he doesn’t want to sleep,” said little Natásha with
between life and death, in which death gained the victory. It was
now to look at Dólokhov, who was sitting opposite him. Every time


had long noticed what was going on between them and was expecting this




was often on Dólokhov’s face when looking at him. “Yes, he is a

his other foot down and sank deeper still, became stuck in it, and
often occurred to me: ‘This is fate.’ Especially if you remember that

roll, had supper, and settled down round the fires for the night—some

killed.” Rook tried to rise on his forelegs but fell back, pinning his
smile: “I meant merely to say what I said.”
assumed an unnatural pose. Enthusiastic whispering was audible.
The eighth and largest group, which in its enormous numbers was to the
came to inform him that the money needed for the equipment of his

his horse with a convoy officer’s saddle.
It is time for bed.”
presented itself to his mind. He had long ago pictured to himself a
reasons were very insufficient and obscure, no one made any rejoinder.
on it, and when he has time tears out its contents and burns it clean.
Natásha told her that at first there had been danger from his feverish
over with mystic forces! Yes, indeed, I loved her. I made romantic plans
excellent mother. Oh, my friend! Religion, and religion alone, can—I
unreal immobility in space and to recognize a motion we did not feel;
proposal to move troops by night from the right to the left flank to
same!”
guests returned to the drawing room and to the count’s study.
impossible to say what would happen if he lived another year that he
family group broke up.

    CHAPTER XXVII
when he used to be undressed and put to bed, and when leaning over him


“Daniel, tell them to saddle for us, and Michael must come with my
shall not agree with you, and you do not really believe what you are
all.”

her own on the subject.

aquaintances. It goes without saying that one must be conscientious and
    CHAPTER III

Toll, and others again to Alexander himself—pointing to notes, projects,

“The news is reliable,” said Bolkhovítinov. “Prisoners, Cossacks, and

“That is what we shall see! That is what we shall see!” he added
“Then he is alive,” thought Princess Mary, and asked in a low voice:

with the bachelor sets, leading such a life that the Countess Hélène

“Matvévna’s” carriage. At the foot of the hill, a pale hussar

“There, there! Do you feel it? I feel so strange. And do you know,
nephew’s lessons, she was informed that Rostóv had called. With a firm

it remained an army only until its soldiers had dispersed into their
Redoubt opposite, which had been ours the day before and where several
adopted in similar cases, simply and easily pick up the first cudgel
been reassigned to his former squadron, had been on duty and had gone
girl (it was strange to see the color rise in that shaggy, bibulous,
Pierre paused and looked at Anatole no longer with an angry but with a
one had to ridicule the Moscow enthusiasm, at Anna Pávlovna’s one had to
    BOOK FOURTEEN: 1812
his elbow for a long time, gazing at the shadows that moved past him in
“A live one!” shouted a man as a whistling shell approached.
a hoar frost now turning to dew, but in the valleys it still lay like a
were heard through the firing, but it was impossible to tell what was
possible. Sónya and her mother put themselves entirely in her hands.

to speak he seemed not to know how he would conclude.
the French were in Moscow, and (above all) a dim consciousness in every
the right they will expose a flank to me. Soldiers! I will myself direct



on both sides.


And this was not the result of logical reasoning but was a direct and
But enough of gossip. I am at the end of my second sheet of paper, and
To Princess Mary it was strange that now, at a moment when such sorrow

government. And if Arakchéev ordered me to lead a squadron against you

officers of the Guard and from French headquarters were dining and
“And how could you believe he was my lover? Why? Because I like
the decisive point, and gains the victory alone. “But death and
unattainable in this life and of which she involuntarily thought at that
discovered.
Dólokhov, whom everyone in the house liked except Natásha. She almost


his wife’s drawing room as one enters a theater, was acquainted with

table began to watch her hands arranging the cards. From the dancing
the whole expanse.
“Not that either. That puts the court in too bad a light,” replied
to retreat along the road from Krems to Olmütz, to unite with the
began jumping and striking one foot rapidly against the other. In the

passionately, at which she laughed; at the other could be heard the
in such cases they omit all that makes for the contrary. And the more

the corner came Daniel the head huntsman and head kennelman, a gray,

show her over, and they’ll talk nineteen to the dozen. That’s
reality and delirium in which something particular was happening. In
handkerchief, and pipe.
Why did I bind myself to her? Why did I say ‘Je vous aime’ * to her,
attention from the unfinished game.
expecting the summons to zakúska, * avoid engaging in any long


“But how could one say that in Russian?”
frightened glance as if not understanding why this was done to him. A
houses off.
thick, bushy eyebrows. Prince Andrew went up and kissed his father on
to be the reading of a letter from His Lordship the Bishop when sending
can exist, nor any conception of historical events.
killing a man as the result of recognizing his rights, and the killing
myself above him and so become much worse than he, for he is lenient
of frieze, blue trousers, and large torn Hessian boots. The little
allies—the Poles. There are eighty thousand of them and they fight like
do they look at me?” Then he lifted his head, stretched his neck as
evil intent though he might have refrained from coming in. Then who was
told him the whole affair, asking him to intercede for Denísov, whom
Guards charged, followed the line of reserves, going far round the place
From Orshá they fled farther along the road to Vílna, still playing
man. I used to meet him at Mary Antónovna’s,” said the countess in an
Nicholas, but even Natásha understood the meaning of his puckered brow

felt sure his commander was sending for him to punish him for breach of
Pávlovna threatened him on behalf of “our dear Vyazmítinov,” and
part of the dowry in advance, he would have to break matters off.

cadet, supporting one hand with the other, came up to Túshin and asked

met the regiment announced that all the huts were full of sick and dead
grand, *(2) and his soul is tranquil.
He knew this at that moment as surely as if he had been standing at the
defines this freedom by the laws of reason, and so history is a science
    CHAPTER XVIII
or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with
crowding and hurrying across the bridge, ascending on the opposite side
at the club dinner.
Denísov spoke contemptuously of the whole matter, but Rostóv knew him
added, looking smilingly at the little girl who clung to her father.
“Si vous envisagez la question sous ce point de vue,” * he began,

the last syllable of the general’s name like a Frenchman, “has been
“What a young lady she is!” remarked the major-domo.

as if guessing what it was about.
that I should meet her just when Natásha’s engagement had been broken
with one leg crossed high above the other. His cheeks, which were so

“Because it’s useless.”
my dear boy, are you serving in the Horse Guards?” asked the old man,
before, just as he never could repeat to Pierre the words of his
    CHAPTER XIV
Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
and went as usual to thank the old countess, Countess Mary held out her
“No, my dear fellow, I’ll be a wallflower,” said Denísov.
lid, drew out a drawer, and took out an exercise book filled with his
softened their disposition but had on the contrary strengthened in
searching for potatoes, but found few even of these.

so far from home that he accepted “Uncle’s” offer that the hunting
did. “Home, I told you! And drive faster, blockhead!” “I must get away

re-formed, and then moved with a hum of talk into the largest hall and
lay in abandoning the immediate sensation of the earth’s fixity and of
be. Of the four crystal glasses engraved with the count’s monogram
that in spite of all the unpleasantness he had to endure he would still

on the bed, lit his pipe, furiously scattered his things about, took


a traitor yourself! I know you. I’ll flay you all alive!...” And as if
Sónya, for there is nothing but good in her.”
When the reading which lasted more than an hour was over, Langeron again
with its marshals, kings, and Emperor was not captured, if that was what
columns of French should show themselves.
of now as the “Seeker,” now as the “Sufferer,” and now as the
Hippolyte gazing round with importance at the others, “without
gentle childlike smile, and Hélène smiled too.
Wolzogen, shrugging his shoulders and curling his lips, stepped silently
facts he felt to be of historic importance. As the Emperor’s suite


Vereshchágin...”

Kindle in all hearts the flame of virtue. Share thy happiness with thy
rushing to his face. “How can you judge the Emperor’s actions? What
Next day the decrepit Kutúzov, having given orders to be called early,
his companion. The latter, a fresh, rosy officer of the Guards,
there. Now then!”
“Not yet. But where are you off to?”
that Prince Andrew could not refuse to stay to dinner. “Yes,”
rearguard all the freshness of atmosphere of the French army, which was
someone to fire at.
The whole day had been hot. Somewhere a storm was gathering, but only
horses near the window, Prince Andrew felt that something important and
does not come from the quarter they expect. It rises again from the same
an end of it in each hand, went out into the street.

of your misfortune.” He seemed to emphasize the last word, as if to
it suitable that Count Kutúzov, the oldest general in Russia, should
Dimmler, who had seated himself beside the countess, listened with
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
between his acts as a private person, as a general, and as an emperor.
giving the messenger a significant look.
were at law, hunted over places that belonged by custom to the Rostóvs,
skittles,” said he in conclusion.


princesses spent most of their time, he greeted the ladies, two of whom
but everywhere—on the slopes and on the roofs. As soon as Pétya found
father—Prince Andrew—and his father had neither shape nor form, but he

dismounting he ordered a plan of Moscow to be spread out before him, and
that those broad-boned reddish hands with hairy wrists visible from



of generation, he sees hundreds of dull, listless, and sleepy shells of
The men crowded closer together, stirred, and rapidly took off their
himself, “but I can’t coerce my feelings. If I love Sónya, that
Your Majesty at every opportunity, with the affectation unavoidable in
with a gloomy and tired face, was wearily taking off his wraps with the
madam!”
a quite peculiar way. Natásha was so used to this kind of talk with her
round hole in the canvas to represent the moon, shades were raised over
slaughter one another, triumph and are plunged in despair, and for some

which he ceased coming to the Rostóvs’.
and every strap in place, and shone with cleanliness. And not only
why she’s ashamed!”
Not all the Cossacks and hussars were asleep; here and there, amid the
himself, he rose, threw back his head, and with resolute steps went
and wife can talk, that is, with extraordinary clearness and rapidity,
he had so despised seven years before.
She led him into the dark drawing room and Pierre was glad no one could
up their knapsacks with a jerk of their shoulders and pulling the straps

completely. The count was not angry even when they told him that Natásha
Every Russian looking at Moscow feels her to be a mother; every
calm, indifferent crowd of people unaware of what was going on in his

alike, felt that the commander did not himself know what to do, and this
The first act was over. In the stalls everyone began moving about, going
wealthy heiress and also by the fact that the older she grew the less
go away, but the officer would not hear of it. He was so very polite,
taking offense, but you don’t mind disgracing the whole regiment!”
continued to turn over the pages and read. In the diary was set down
On that first evening Bolkónski spent with him, having mentioned the
broke the silence. All eyes were gazing at him. Malásha too looked at
passionate admiration for him similar to that which he had once felt for
“You will change it, won’t you?” said Lise. And as Princess Mary
on her face.
being done in the political world. Incidents were related evidently
combination of incongruities giving the chief charm to the feeling.
    CHAPTER X
knew that an apple should not be plucked while it is green. It will fall
Sónya entered the room with an agitated face.
mortally wounded animal licks its wounds, they remained inert in Moscow
mountains of Bohemia, and you and your army would have spent a bad

left off loving Prince Andrew? And how could she let Kurágin go to

approached Lázarev (who rolled his eyes and persistently gazed at his
when she reflected on the change. But when she was with Natásha she was
it.”
shudder, blush, and feel such a rush of anger and pride as she had never
house seemed topsy-turvy. All the doors were open, all the furniture was
“Now you don’t know that at all!” said Nicholas. “But I must


of a hundred thousand we must expect at least twenty thousand wounded,

sacrifices I know how to appreciate.”
without aim or object for her existence. She ate, drank, slept, or kept
crying and were able to go to him with calm faces.
done at Mozháysk after the battle of Borodinó.
manifest? If I see, clearly see, that ladder leading from plant to man,

without the Revolution and without the Empire. If the aim was the
French artillery fire was directed against it, the man sent there was
men cry, though angry with himself for doing so. In the crowd people


their mouths, and fanned it with the skirts of their greatcoats, making
“I promised to go to a reception.”
thought which tranquillized Rostopchín was not a new one. Since the

weren’t told anything. There were some twenty of us lying there. We had
    CHAPTER XIV
They all had business with Pierre and wanted decisions from him. Pierre
space, seemed suddenly—like an arrow piercing the earth—to remain
When it came to Natásha’s turn to choose a partner, she rose and,

say that the Frenchman who had brought the letter from the countess
    CHAPTER XXXII
theaters. Natásha felt offended by the hesitation she had noticed in
drooping tail.


emaciated sallow man on crutches, barefoot and in underclothing, limped
which was usually toward seven o’clock when she had had an after-dinner

Natásha’s beauty. She looked at Natásha’s dresses and praised


purposely dropped a handkerchief in front of him and stood looking
of whether he were heard or not.
been so many less men in Napoleon’s army and the war could not have
such conditions. You say I have begun this war! But who first joined his
reaching its goal. It fled like a wounded animal and it was impossible
Borís.
The countess’ face flushed hotly, but she said nothing.
Pierre finished his story. Natásha continued to look at him intently
the woman’s vehicle for trying to get ahead of others, and the strokes
“Singers to the front” came the captain’s order.
“No, impossible!” said Prince Andrew, laughing and pressing
From Prince Shcherbátov’s house the prisoners were led straight down the
his lips trembled and he began to cry, in the way full-blooded grown-up
CHAPTER XV
“They’re coming!... they’re coming!... Stand aside, make way,
devoured him with his eyes, drawing himself up obsequiously, and from
where she had sat down on arriving and paid no attention to her father’s

“My passion! I have had so many,” replied Pierre.
concluded that the battle was lost, and sent his favorite officer to the

a talk with you, Countess,” he added after a moment’s pause.
differed only in that one had a little mole on her lip which made her
can’t be done. And besides, if she tells Mamma” (Sónya looked upon

dog was merrier and sleeker than it had been in Moscow. All around lay
people were in one of the inner rooms, not considering it necessary to
interrupted him. He himself did not yet know what he would say, but he
to behave here as you did in Petersburg, you will end very badly; that
“Ah! here’s the warrior! Wants to vanquish Buonaparte?” said the
“Well, go and see,” he said, after a pause.
saying.” Prince Andrew looked silently at Pierre with an ironic smile.
used to say that a nap “after dinner was silver—before dinner,
for they could not be carried out, and though they entitled one
lies in the family.
“The word attack is always on your tongue, but you don’t see that we are

“Hurrah!” pursued them so far beyond the battery that it was difficult
“What’s this?” thought Nicholas. “Where’s that huntsman from?

Konovnítsyn had understood at once that the news brought was of great
bathed in moonlight and motionless spread out before them glittering

Rugáy, his back still muddy, came into the room and lay down on the
you sleep? Only look how glorious it is! Ah, how glorious! Do wake up,
from the shed, and looking in that direction Prince Andrew recognized
The arrival of Dólokhov diverted Pétya’s attention from the drummer boy,
“Oh, it would be a terrible loss, she is an enchanting woman.”
Prince Andrew caught him by the hand.

partially. For the most part things happened contrary to their orders.
of profound wisdom.
“Ah, yes! That’s a whole long story! How are you going to speak to
the young prince. The members of the household were all gathered in the
That evening Márya Dmítrievna was going to the Akhárovs’ and
The fact was accordingly conveyed to Lavrúshka.


eyes, and her expression of continual readiness to pass at once from
find, and still seeks, some secret motive in our actions. What answer
which they had put him and turned him over again confused his thoughts,
haste to satisfy all their expectations.
if it could not succeed it would not do to take young ladies and house
Next day, overtaking the army, he went in a carriage to the Niemen, and,
“Sónya?” she thought, glancing at that curled-up, sleeping little

green plums they had dropped.
with all his remaining strength.
man—the wisest and best of men—who was saying it of her. “There

and the rest, pass before their stern judgment seat and are acquitted or
door, made her immediately forget herself and her own grief.
habit began with the princess, the prince suddenly grew furious,

jumped up, jerking the rings of the leashes and pricking their ears.
“Paris—the capital of the world,” Pierre finished his remark for him.
him in the same direction. On the tenth of June, * coming up with the
communication still more. If it is said that he expected to end the
eager questions from all sides. The whole moving mass began pressing
So long as histories are written of separate individuals, whether
important French official in a carriage and pair driven by a soldier,
lived appeared on the surface. All her inward labor, her dissatisfaction
following the mass movements and general orders, and constantly studying
don’t grieve for myself,’ he says, ‘God, it seems, has chastened me.
like to serve, and Prince Andrew lost his standing in court circles
following him.
“It’s a lackey’s job!”

There was nothing wrong or unseemly in what they said, it was witty and
shone with such gaiety and youth, such innocent youth, that it suggested
wailing and lamenting as they said good-by. A small watchdog ran round

“We are all in God’s hands,” said he, with a sigh.

was still burning, and the same shirtlike sphinx lay near the door; but

externally was all in order, but had it pleased the commander in chief
smoothly brushed forward over his temples, with expressionless face was
refusal with his head and hand and by that gesture Rostóv instantly
Pierre had seen in their own homes with their buffoons, or playing
ring.
my message wrong. I only said that you were to give them the grain.”
found, and the whole pack, joining together, rushed along the ravine
like these if one has any feeling?” said Anna Pávlovna. “You are
Rostóv saw that it had been well considered by them. Sónya had already
been preparing for it, and with a low bow offered it to Kutúzov.
CHAPTER XXXIV

were to take some of the wounded away, shouts, curses, and blows could
fretted to utter that word, and letting the borzois slip he galloped
“Everything’s still the same with them,” thought Nicholas,
    CHAPTER VII
day he had lost. He was happy as a lover when the longed-for moment of
different directions like ants from a ruined ant-hill. Several of them
embraced the one true faith, and asking him to carry out all the
Prince Andrew, with a smile.
close to her, began to whisper something.
Borís, or between you two? It’s all nonsense!”
direct a force of any size against Petersburg to threaten this capital

pleased!” And he held out his hand to the captain.

again—another week past,” she thought, recalling that she had been here
Thus our conception of free will and inevitability gradually diminishes
middle, a cry was heard, then Princess Mary’s heavy tread and the
The glow of the first fire that began on the second of September was
Prince Andrew’s little son was seven. He could scarcely read, and knew
still in terror. But an irresistible impulse drew her forward. She
“From the general,” said the officer. “Please excuse its not being quite
Dólokhov, who had already changed into a soldier’s gray greatcoat,
manly-looking, but what amazed and estranged Pierre till he got used
with red light like a Russian church during evening service. Under
Ferapóntov. “What has been decided?”
During one of these moments of awkward silence when Anatole’s
“But you’ll be late for dinner.”
magnate was at first as much taken aback by this suggestion of marriage
foundation.
It was plain that Balashëv’s personality did not interest him at all.
horizon—from that day the problem of the vanity and uselessness of all
Pierre wished to say that he was ready to sacrifice his money, his
to express our sincere views on that subject, and can only say to the



standing in the yard directing the men.
column marches... The third column marches...” and so on, read
and noticed long ago at the ball in Petersburg. He was now in an
at one another.
time that day to inspect the fortifications of the Drissa camp, of the
“There, how that devil hits out! He’s made my face all bloody,” said he
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm collection.
Speránski smiled and said he could not judge of the advantage or
held the hand of his betrothed in silence, looking at her beautiful

go.
had not received a single reply to his repeated announcements of his
just inside the door, trying to speak softly and not move, for fear of
father’s funeral, her voice trembled. She turned away, and then, as if
disdainful of everybody and who considered himself above them, was all

From the way the regimental commander saluted the commander in chief and

bushes parted behind the hounds and Daniel’s chestnut horse appeared,
Napoleon ordered an army to be raised and go to war. We are so
Rostóv family was absorbed in various activities. The head of the
To us it is incomprehensible that millions of Christian men killed and

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
“There can be no doubt about it, your Highness.”
History proves this at every turn. Is the ferment of the peoples of
before his Old Guards, renounced the throne and went into exile. Then
unpleasantly excited expression.
Prince Andrew jumped up as if someone had burned him, and again began
followed him in some excitement. Seeing the enemies exchanging friendly
time, muttering to herself.
“What is this, my dear? I hear that the luggage is being unloaded.”
with this feeling of tenderness and love he experienced: in comparison
drowned as usual by the buzzing of the court drones. But the calm,
of expressing his views regardless of anybody. All the benefit he might
subtleties here beyond my feeble intelligence, but I can’t make it
that she was and is perfectly free and that I wish her all that is
“It all depends on the bringing up,” remarked the visitor.
country house in the far distance.
Stepánovich Adráksin. Adráksin was in uniform, and whether as a result

to do what was for him the most difficult thing in life—to say an
“It seems it’s no use knocking one’s head against a wall!” he
countess won’t on any account leave Moscow till her son returns.”
ma parole d’honneur!” *


Bourienne had long been waiting for a Russian prince who, able to
and by his sedate deliberate walk he wished to appear a grown-up man.
guests were and exchanging glances with Natásha, who was sitting

her thin lips grew white, though her eyes did not change, and her voice

While the horses were being harnessed Alpátych and Ferapóntov over their
they had looked at the regimental commander, seeming by their expression
adding, “your excellency.”

It was already growing dusk when Denísov, Pétya, and the esaul rode up
defended and others still discussed it, the question was no longer
from its aim. Kutúzov’s wish was to attack next day, and the whole


“Eh?” murmured Platón, who had almost fallen asleep. “What was I saying?
word of command, the whole squadron, sharing his feeling, was following
And Prince Dolgorúkov rapidly but indistinctly explained Weyrother’s

Bald Hills. Prince Andrew, glancing at Pierre, broke the silence now and

desire, but there was pity for her feminine and childish weakness, fear
quoique étranger, russe de cœur et d’âme, * as he said of himself.
“Hadn’t I better ride over, your excellency?” asked Nesvítski.

not abandon the edifice of argument he had laboriously constructed.
“You are going?” asked Natásha. “I knew you would! Sónya said
His wound, though a slight one, had not yet healed even now, six weeks

to his knees, bowed to the ground, and for a long time tried vainly to
the corner of the house with a frightened yet resolute look, carrying a
“Sónya, one can’t doubt him! One can’t, one can’t! Don’t you

And in the fifth verse of the same chapter:
vividly did he recall that hospital stench of dead flesh that he

even more merrily than on the previous night. Denísov celebrated his
“Nothing of the sort. Orders are issued for a battle.”
She heard, or thought she heard, the names of Kurágin and Bolkónski. But
go out into society; everyone knew that her father would not let her
to his own.
another to try Ilyín’s horse.
countess, and Natásha sat down beside a little chess table with Sónya,
“How beautiful she is!” Natásha remarked to her father who had also

time, Anna Mikháylovna sent someone to call her son, and went into the
hubs of the wheels, and the infantry sank ankle-deep in that soft,
begun to understand too much. And it doesn’t do for man to taste of the
into the river. He gave an angry thrust to his horse, which had grown
feeling agitated her.
“And you didn’t see that everybody is packing up?”
Napoleon to Madame de Staël, Photius, Schelling, Fichte, Chateaubriand,
opposing this is not a power but a violation of power—mere violence.
even my maid has taken to being rude. At this rate they will soon begin
“Yet you do not care to avail yourself of the privilege, Prince,”
returned from them dragging sheep, fowls, hay, and bulging sacks. At
go to. All orders as to where and when to move the guns, when to send
Prince Andrew liked dancing, and wishing to escape as quickly as
wounded and captured Russian officers he was carried to the hospital.
now saw something else that absorbed all her attention. She saw the
human being. He reflected for a moment.

experienced for a long while. She did not realize who and where she
juridical science gives us, humanity would conclude that power is merely

he had lain there some time, he was told to get up, and a white leather
anyone who traveled anywhere would have found himself always in the

querulousness, which generally culminated in a burst of rage, and she

colonel who was standing in the meadow, he gave him some message and
village of Nóvoe, and the center at Borodinó at the confluence of the

remained Russian. Well, I don’t esteem you the less for it.”
obtained his captaincy during the campaign, had gained the confidence of
wing of the house, which was burning brightly and fiercely. One of its
not expressed so much in his relations with him as with all his family
laughed. “I dreamed last night...”—“You were not expecting
joins the Allies, Austria’s hand will be forced and there will be war.
A soldier on the march is hemmed in and borne along by his regiment as


broken off, the porch, and the post by the side of the pavement. He
into his room one evening in the official and ceremonious manner in
of his displeasure without attaining her object. “Besides,” he
left Moscow—as a child wants the floor on which he has hurt himself to
Andrew entered the passage. Kutúzov himself, he was told, was in the
(the one who had paraded his regiment before Kutúzov at Braunau) that
position of that insignificant individual was such as could certainly
majority of men regard as the greatest good in the world. Pierre had
pledge!”
the shrines of the Moscow saints. She suggested that Natásha should fast
Returning from his journey through South Russia in the happiest state
breadth the solution of the question, which has another, opposite, side,

“Well, let her sleep,” said Márya Dmítrievna as she went out of the room
was Borís Drubetskóy, who had just arrived as a special messenger from
cheerfulness (it seemed to Countess Mary that he did it on purpose to
prompt departure. Princess Mary listened without understanding him; she
cavalry saddles or Junot’s baggage. They understood that the saddles and
the first to begin the explanation Sónya expected.
triumph.
of a battle but also disbelieved in the nearness of an engagement.
reproachfully, with a deep sigh, as her daughter ran away.
is the passion for destruction.

were sent to the crossroads to guide him over the country road with its

“Ready, ready, dear fellow!” said Karatáev, coming out with a neatly

about a mile and a half off on the opposite heights. Down below, on
acquainted with Prince Andrew Bolkónski, through whom he hoped to
amiable, good-natured, and genuinely grateful to Pierre for saving his

shone into the open window, lighting up the room and part of the morocco

and who is not displeased that it should be so. The unbrushed tufts
heart. “It has begun! Here it is, dreadful but enjoyable!” was what
malodorous mouth. Tears actually moistened his cheeks.
a man has to talk, talk, and talk, merely to convince himself that he is


prisoner?” each was thinking. But the French officer was evidently more
come from their Ryazán and Moscow estates to remove their household
to what he must do and how he should answer, Willarski only replied that
Just then the lady companion who lived with Hélène came in to announce
are over. Remember me to Stëshka. There, good-by! Good-by, Matrëna, wish
Nicholas did not hear his own cry nor feel that he was galloping, nor
it.
the person for whom they were waiting. Some walked thoughtfully up and
of the Guards, a girl of fifteen, and a plump rosy-faced boy in a short
the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an


spent, and almost every year he was obliged to borrow. Besides this the
go there anyhow and I have already spoken to him about you. We shall
of voices, the tramping feet, the horses’ hoofs moving in mud, the

generals.



any single action is due to free will, then not a single historical law
tenth I don’t receive news that they have all got away I shall have to


Smolénsk. Fortune is frankly a courtesan, Rapp. I have always said so
founded a society and in consequence has great influence, they say.”
him and taken him under their protection, he would have given everything
and you.”
are not here. I came to the battle and have lost them.”
condition! It’s very hard.”
would be dreadful for me. He then still wished to live and feared death.
“Excuse me, General,” interrupted Kutúzov, also turning to Prince
mingle. He mentally appointed a governor, one who would win the
intact between the Russian and French forces. In the refreshment room

He himself seemed aware that his demand was meaningless. So at least it
She had not yet gone to bed when the Rostóvs arrived and the pulley of
Suddenly Prince Bolkónski frowned.

said Shinshín, laughing ironically and mixing the most ordinary Russian
one of the best matches in Russia.
Pierre nor did Natásha speak of him.
sympathy for others shone in his eyes with a questioning look as to
but which yet aroused involuntary horror in him was drawing near.
he uttered a plaintive cry of pain, and that cry was fatal. The barrier

baseness become evident.

“Hallo, Gwíska—my pipe!” came Vasíli Denísov’s husky voice.

all right on a loaded cart....”
good is past? And to feel not exactly dull, but sad?”

“Do you know, Rapp, what military art is?” asked he. “It is the art of
the IRS.
was Mademoiselle Bourienne. She greeted the father and daughter
They rode through the village of Rykónty, past tethered French hussar
groan, said to herself with a sigh that things were still the same.
audible, broken whisper, and began kissing his hand more rapidly, just
Princess Mary with a gaily mocking smile: “He looks just, yes, just as
“I am here, your excellency.”

me?” he said to God. “I know Thou art great, and that it is a sin to
“Where? Where?” asked Pierre.
said Perónskaya, indicating Hélène who had just entered. “How
next day a throng of acquaintances who came to pay their last respects

behind his back. His old sister-in-law popped in a small bundle, and one

thing that rarely happened with him.
and I beg you all to help me. Brünn’s attractions must be shown him.
that of the lady in the black dress and said:
“Your excellency,” said Rostóv, “may I ask a favor?”
CHAPTER IX
at this fifth murder. Like the others this fifth man seemed calm; he
members of our lodge. Apart from the fact that he had asked me several


his Cossack and brought back some bags which contained about five pounds
nothing, nothing, nothing! No, don’t marry, my dear fellow; don’t

particularly striking contrast to the facts when some strong rise or
in spite of repeated demands boots had not been issued by the Austrian
the ground, the other being caught in the stirrup. His eyes, screwed
on the contrary it gave her an unnatural, and therefore unpleasant,
Think that he is your father ... perhaps in the agony of death.” She
already, but then he cannot know what I think of him and may imagine

to recognize in this robust, motherly woman the slim, lively Natásha of
queen, but the king waved his arm severely, and men and women with bare

he added, and looked up at Pierre who was just approaching them.
be arranged, it is all very clear; but when applied to history that
Pierre quickly took out his purse and watch, but could not manage for
alien face of that man, his bayonet hanging down, holding his breath,
exposed! If I were asked what I desire most on earth, it would be to be
and immeasurable meanness.

invalid,” said Anna Pávlovna, exchanging an alarmed glance with her
    * As looters.
angling, while his grandson, with shirt sleeves rolled up, handled the
on and not block the way.
gun to another with a frowning face. The young officer, with his face
him, and he looked at the fallow field, the bushes, and the sky, and

and fighting, not at all as the gunner and the Frenchman with frightened
“Well, then, are you refusing Prince Andrew?” said Sónya.

Petersburg and staying at his house. With apparent absent-mindedness,
Since Bennigsen, who corresponded with the Emperor and had more
of people shouting at a tavern Mamónov’s Cossacks had set up across the

men with broad, self-confident faces, fat fingers, and resolute gestures
any explanations you can give me.”
father and son. This lasted about two minutes, which to Pierre seemed an
a sort of presentiment that it would not come off. She is a sterile
“Your excellency!” he said. “Why, we were beginning to despair! How is
thousands and millions of hints and expectations to the contrary
not write, because she could not conceive the possibility of expressing

his lips in his sleep and breathing evenly.
world what it was that people had mistaken for strength as long as an
the passage. Only Malásha, Andrew’s six-year-old granddaughter whom
“You have hurried here. I am very glad. Well, what is Paris saying?” he
the thing is that these two hundred thousand men will fight and the side
him, and so in his relations with that former circle he confined himself
the same walls, sounds, and smell, and the same timid faces, only
yours!”—he had cheerfully taken up his familiar business, and—like a
Alexander was clearly heard. He gave the words of greeting, and the

great agitation. He knew from experience the tormenting expectation of

she would do anything and was prepared for anything, but gave no actual
“But what is there in running across it like that?” said Ilágin’s
eternal personification of the spirit of simplicity and truth.
room.
but everybody understood that the old man was blameworthy and
drawing room.

with exasperation, symptoms of a growing attachment between her son and

Before long Borís, Berg’s old comrade, arrived. There was a shade of
his name.
     commend that view.”
with the strict formality of his house. At that moment the great clock
harder from behind.
cannon, was a small, newly constructed wattle shed from which came the
CHAPTER XXV
“Well, say you went to the barn now, and listened. It depends on what
Before Anna Pávlovna and the others had time to smile their
employ, but those folk sayings which taken without a context seem so
a suffocating smell of powder, and Prince Andrew started to one side,
where he had been in the habit of putting up for the last thirty years.

(3) However accessible may be the chain of causation of any action, we
enter that room.
Lannes and was thrown into confusion. Bagratión had sent Zherkóv
position and acquaintances, tried to fathom the character of the control



years before with Joseph Bazdéev, came out in answer to his knock.
a meeting with Napoleon. To the joy and pride of the whole army, a
and takes bribes. What nonsense! Besides, why shouldn’t he take bribes?
appear as if he did not want any of that wine, but was mortified because
But apparently the coachman’s sympathy was not enough for Peter, and
listening to the sounds and looking in silence at the people.
that had previously occurred to him of the cabalistic significance of
windows of the Senate House the soldiers threw chairs into the Square
before. Ilyín tried to imitate Rostóv in everything and adored him as a
“So you’ve found your folk?” said one of them. “Well, good-by, Peter
away.
because he rose superior to the Revolution, suppressed its abuses,

count,” yet ashamed to call him “father.”
dearest to us. He forgot that what he was saying about Natásha could
Both Márya Dmítrievna and Sónya were amazed when they saw how Natásha
looking at Rostóv, “you’ll win it back all the sooner. I lose to
to talk to Tíkhon who did not understand him. I remember how he began

happiness), feeling the eager bustle around him, and hearing the fitful
established himself with Count Bennigsen, who, like all on whom Borís


of the court scandals contained in the biographies of a Napoleon or
pathetic smile, as though she too knew that Count Rostóv deserved this
Alpátych felt that this unreasonable action might produce good results.
into her mother’s room.
He did not see, hear, or understand anything clearly. Only now and
removing his hand from his hat and galloped back to where men were being
accompanied by two hunt servants.
He might... not only might but should, have gone up to the sovereign. It

which had drawn nearer and was increasing in strength, Alpátych hurried
And so it was: in Sónya’s place sat Natásha who had just come in
Pierre had had done by a miniaturist in Petersburg. The countess had
villages on both sides of the river, over a radius of six miles. Barclay

as elsewhere, he was surrounded by an atmosphere of subservience to
nothing, hurried nowhere, and were ending their days leisurely; when he
the forces of Western Europe began, and in 1812 these forces—millions
nodding to the aide-de-camp.
answers. The old valet Tíkhon, with sunken, emaciated face that bore the
A crowd had collected round the Uhlans. Nearest to Pierre stood the
And he caught the bear, took it in his arms, lifted it from the ground,

particular person was based. Thiers, a Bonapartist, says that Napoleon’s
in which she had her being.
On October 22, Denísov (who was one of the irregulars) was with his
not evince the least interest during this explanation, but as if he were
Europe to him, and have now come to teach us. Fine teachers!” and again
CHAPTER XVI
the snuffbox in his hand but not taking any. After the cry of the hounds
“It’s not at all from friendship,” declared Nicholas, flaring
sums offered for the horses and carts, but on the previous evening and
he reflected on those irrational, inexpressible thoughts, secret as a
pesthouse, sir.”



to Pierre. He spoke in French. “I only know two very real evils in
change.

for Prince Andrew.
like Speránski—was distinctly ejaculating ha-ha-ha. Prince Andrew

I know you will pray over it. Well, pray if you like, but you had better

by one persistent thought. He did not know how or when this thought had

the Emperor) “need only say the word and we’ll all die fo’ him!” added

witty, and at every opportunity he uttered in that way the first words


Master, “but those between virtue and vice. Beware of making any

“Look at our Anna Mikháylovna—what a headdress she has on!”
quick!” she shouted to the count who was going to kiss her hand.


presence in their house, despite her sincere pity for him and for
you don’t bring your lovely girls—who are prettier than Mademoiselle
had scope for its development in Africa. Whatever he does succeeds. The

couple of words with him, Pierre felt unable to disappoint him.
“Permit me, Princess, to know what is necessary and what is not
superstition, and only two virtues—activity and intelligence. He
through my friendship?” demanded Napoleon, shrugging his shoulders
the whole position of our troops. Pierre listened to him, straining each

    CHAPTER XXXIV
clever I am and how... charming she is,” she went on, speaking
“Well, I don’t know about that, but I am uncomfortable with him. And
The idea of defeat and flight could not enter Rostóv’s head. Though

nothing more to do. But his thoughts—the simplest, clearest, and
One of the men came out of the crowd and went up to Rostóv.
preserving order looted Moscow or saved their own property from being
limit of time in less than which no amount of heat can melt the snow. On
at a command, everyone began to run.

And the birches with their light and shade, the curly clouds, the
couples out of the circle. All but one rejoined their companies. This
again started reckoning. Two French soldiers ran past Pierre, one of

said Véra, “because I know what interests each of them and what to

“Charming!” said Anna Pávlovna with an inquiring glance at the
with greater heat than ever in the highest circles, between the parties

beating us. One can’t walk in the streets. But, above all, the French
(Thiers says), and he issued the order for departure which the whole

“Mind and don’t let her slip!”
not grow weary of it and wished to hear it again and again. Anísya


uneasily as if preparing to resent any slight that might be put upon the
them with his hand.
“And I!”—She turned away for an instant. “Why too much?” she asked.
CHAPTER XI
“That’s enough, Natásha,” said Sónya. “I see you were right, but just
which the whole household had assembled. At that table were his mother,

soap, and all,” as the soldiers say. There was only one circumstance
“Health, at a time like this?” said the count. “Come, tell us the news!

always well disposed toward him, and Kutúzov suggested that he should
truth of his statements.
With regard to religion, as to which in Egypt matters had so easily been
with a hum of conversation, like the hum of bees swarming in springtime.
how he could ask such a question. Pierre went into the study. Prince
crimes, frauds, treacheries, thefts, forgeries, issues of false money,
revolution, which has become more terrible than ever in the person of

and urging it on with his saber. In another moment Rostóv’s horse dashed
smiling at his reassuring thoughts.

“How sweet!” said Countess Mary, looking at and playing with the baby.
never authorized to make that demand, and as soon as I was informed of
it had come of itself. Now he rode beside Ilyín under the birch trees,
a soldier’s cross, equally shabby cadet’s riding breeches lined with
efforts to seem calm.
“And where’s the fur cloak?” asked Dólokhov. “Hey, Ignátka! Go to

spread by the fact that the Emperor’s carriage had really galloped

Chernýshev was sitting at a window in the first room with a French novel
ride—to try a new horse Ilyín had bought and to find out whether there
Drubetskáya, who as a member of the household was also seated in the
possible from places where people were killing one another, to some
replied.
another—Bernadotte, who promptly went mad—for no Swede would ally
steps onto the smooth surface of a bog. When he put his foot down it
Kutúzov accompanied by his adjutants rode at a walking pace behind the
your wife...”
I kill him? My hand trembled. And they have given me a St. George’s
or such plans to the Russian commanders. All the facts are in flat
     destroyed, and you find that a cause for jesting!”
“Why does she come prowling here? What does she want? I can’t bear these
écossaise was ended, he clapped his hands to the musicians and shouted
away again, she rose frowning, and clasping her hands behind her paced
and his friend’s. He tried equally to avoid thinking about his wife,
She struck those who saw her by her fullness of life and beauty,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
the marriage was to be postponed for a year. “But why a year? Why a
further back till his curly hair touched his shirt collar, and the hand
When Princess Mary returned to her room after her nocturnal talk with
peasants he knew, from whom he told him to take the carts.
stern and solemn train of thought that weakness from loss of blood,
he added, turning to Rostóv.
had sighted the hare—and not without agitation he looked round and
Princess Mary looked at him with astonishment. She did not understand


that time that it all resulted from the fact that the alliance between


Pierre, girt with a rope round his waist and wearing shoes Karatáev had
utterance are related as commands to the events.
to her as to how she would order her life now, after that. These were
happy faces round the carts. The news that carts were to be had spread
table, and, having laid the manuscripts before him, opened them out,

she could not help watching. As they were leaving the theater Anatole
was holding their horses.
down on her with outstretched hands shouted, “Get out!” in such a
fall asleep, called Dunyásha the maid to put out the candle, and before

denied—and to recognize it as the resultant of the forces, that is, he
paused, “by the authority entrusted to me by my Sovereign and country,
point. What the general was saying was even more clever and to

destructions of power result from a nonobservance by the rulers of the
Turks—the crowd outside spread out and hawkers appeared, selling kvas,
snacks.”
Austria or Prussia, for we have to draw our information from French
“Ask the count to come to me.”
campaign is over?”
eyes and swayed his head. “A matchless people!” he repeated with a sigh.
were not interested in the import of the words spoken, but rather in
God,” and the priest and deacon chimed in: “For to Thee under God we all


from which the sound of voices was heard.

was more important than verses, and Bagratión, again preceding all the
wet, swayed in the wind and flung down bright drops of water to one
wonderful classic beauty of her figure, his face on the contrary
dead or wounded horses and harnessing fresh ones, and shouting in his

her brother’s wound only from the Gazette and having no definite news of

Bolkónski was not announced; Prince Andrew insisted on that. He said
The novelty Anna Pávlovna was setting before her guests that evening
then be in me what there is now. But perhaps he’ll come today, will

significance of his actions which were too contrary to goodness and
Pictures of the near past—her father’s illness and last moments—rose
faces out of the door of a room where a bright samovar was boiling and
hand to her bouquet and dropping his voice, he added, “You will be the


more as he looked at Pierre.

kissing each other on the face, and then to Prince Andrew’s surprise
understood.
“Humbug! Nonsense! Humbug, humbug, humbug!” cried Prince Bolkónski,
pensively, while his handsome lips muttered tenderly to himself.
“The sovereigns? I do not speak of Russia,” said the vicomte, polite


the artillerymen were still as merry and lively as ever. Twice they
The question: how did individuals make nations act as they wished and by
And though it was too dark for Pierre to see, he felt that a suppressed
the mist. From information he had received the evening before, from the
“All right. All right. They’ll be safe with me, as safe as in
fully understanding what she was asking of God in that prayer. She

and hair, without looking at her eyes, with such contempt that the
a celebrated miniaturist, and he leaned over the table to take the

Emperor sees with regret that the picked soldiers appointed to guard his
The icon was carried further, accompanied by the throng. Pierre stopped
pedestal from which he, the commander in chief, devoted all his powers
my brother so little as to be able to forget him so soon?” she thought
dew was imperceptible on the sandy dust churned up more than six inches

glanced vacantly around her, and seeing Natásha began to press her


done, as from the spots selected by Napoleon the projectiles did not
hammering them, we’re to receive double kits!”
farther from him than another; there were none of those uncertain and


affectionate letters to your parents, and if you think you may be
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
waiting for the ladies to appear, Prince Andrew set off for home.

to the palace, however, an official came running out to meet him, and
At that moment the flames flared up and showed his young master’s pale
satisfactory only as long as there is but one historian to each event.
attracted him just as much as ever, but that he must not yield to that
you will see her ‘God’s folk.’ It’s really very curious.”
    CHAPTER X
Dokhtúrov he had the reputation of being a man of very limited capacity
the sides of the carts as they were jolted against one another. Almost
waistcoat. “It’s the sauté, most likely,” she added with a smile.
the struggling men, and the fate of the red-haired gunner, who had
“Illness or not, he’d better not cwoss my path. I’d kill him!”
prince himself) would die before then, and he decided to conform to his
of diamonds and a flight of marble steps and the silver roofs of fairy
intonation, look, and expression, pricked up her ears from the beginning
supper he chatted or listened to conversation or read. But under the

she should not speak French so much. It’s not the time for it now.”
luxurious study and sat down to the dinner prepared for him. Bilíbin
    CHAPTER XIV
Julie and Borís looked on one another as the only souls who understood


had prevailed. She drew her brother’s attention to the maid who was
the power of Hercules; nor can it be based on the effect of moral force,
with carts that it was impossible to get by in a carriage. Prince Andrew
he got into bed, happy and agitated but free from hesitation or
course, and its course was so very usual that it was difficult to
But when events assumed their true historical character, when expressing

food, using his brain, or anything else) he cannot recognize this
information. It followed that there must have been a victory. And at
cathedrals. The longer the French remained the more these forms of town
sleepiness that kept coming over him. An enormous space, with our
face was of a pale-greenish tint, shouting to his men. “Go round! Wait
a surprise, so he pretended not to see de Beausset and called Fabvier to
work, give vent to her anger, and so on, merely because she had a
intimate with the princess as if they were relations.


“No, but don’t you think it’s nice?” she kept repeating.




which fitted him badly like a fancy costume, seemed familiar to Prince
counteract it as far as they can.”

at the front door, and the old nurse—knowing how to please her
“Yes, please do,” answered the general, and he repeated the order
were among the prettiest. They were both particularly happy and gay.
sacrifice his own happiness to his father’s caprice, and spoke of how
position. He kept closing his eyes and then again looking at the fire,
would have me be, but I have never had help from anyone.... But it is
to improve.
well-supplied district and the parallel road was open to him along

the sight of the swaying smoke, now gathering into thick black clouds
to them—that is to say, to a crowd of Frenchmen stark with cold,
“Fine! Just like the Frenchie! Oh, ho ho! Do you want some more to eat?”
not have refrained from had the armies been united and had someone else,




As he was leaving the battery, firing was heard on the left also, and
He had evidently not slept that night. He looked about distractedly and
he came in to dinner straight from the farm—especially before the soup.
When, for instance, we say that Napoleon ordered armies to go to war,

campfires. Our columns ought to have begun to appear on an open
go when she marries, should not neglect her accomplishments, should be

shoulder, and with parental authority superintended the setting out of
“The hours are the same, and the lathe, and also the mathematics and
again and grew unconscious and delirious from the agony. He kept asking
of a locomotive to clear the snow from the rails in front: they clear


they came out on a glade where troops of Túchkov’s corps were stationed
the regiment with these gentlemen, and I consider that on us tomorrow’s
better acquainted she asked that one of the young ladies should come


the gleaming icons stood a long invalid chair, and in that chair
Frenchwoman. She wrote to Prince Andrew about the reception of his

With regard to administrative matters, the establishment of a

“Because, consider, Count—if I allowed myself to marry now
Sometimes when, trying to understand him, she spoke of the good work he
front and men four abreast, spread across the bridge and began to emerge
who did the actual fighting.

times parts of the Pávlograd regiment had exchanged shots with
The sagacious Barclay de Tolly, seeing crowds of wounded men running
knew by experience that if his patient did not die now, he would do so
with tobacco smoke, when someone came in. It was Prince Andrew.
his head on his thin pale hand. His chest is dreadfully hollow and his
Dólokhov himself during his convalescence spoke to Rostóv in a way no
on around him. He remembered the meadow, the wormwood, the field, the
to allude to the past, letting it be understood how delightful was the
Just as horses shy and snort and gather about a dead horse, so the
And this courtier, as he is described to us, who lies to Arakchéev
grandee of Catherine’s time who now lay dying in Moscow. The young man
over with an ear to Julie’s mouth, was Borís’ handsome smoothly
aloud.
face. “Here I am. I am she! Now do you understand ‘Uncle’?” her
that there were no answers to these questions he made haste to turn away


only lit fires to deceive us.
met, she fell on his breast, sobbing. She could not lift her face, but

French infantry were firing as they ran. The hussars galloped hastily
The countess looked round several times at her daughter’s softened face
“What’s this?” said the doctor, rising from his bed. “Please go away,

end...” thought he.
In neither case—however we may change our point of view, however plain


discipline and zeal in the service. He brought with him into our
whether Kurágin was alive. And he dared not inquire.
the direction indicated. At the back entrance stood his calèche. The
fearing to relax, shouted with his mouth wide open and passed on.

things that had never occurred. Mademoiselle Bourienne also shared them
Bagratión cast his large, expressionless, sleepy eyes round his suite,
were kindling glowing fires in a hollow of the forest where the French

into Borís’ eyes. After he had gone Pierre continued pacing up and


Prince Andrew gave him a look, but said nothing and went away. He felt
“not a spire at all, but only an old German ruin.”
deliberately so that everyone could hear:
others as ninety-nine to one, consisted of men who desired neither
Pierre’s gaiety vanished completely. He anxiously questioned the
after his reception by the Austrians, to speak if not in Russian

room leading his hostess by the hand but not keeping time to the
true, or might at least seem to be true had it not referred to his wife.
which at least half of them would be left on the field. After passing a
handsome open face of the man who might perhaps be her husband absorbed
recognition of the fact that it was not the sun but the earth that moves
striking a blow!”
He paused and sighed, evidently trying to calm himself.

rubbed his forehead as if to rid himself of all interest in what he
anything that did not fit in with that aim, the channel was removed and
immediately told him that this man could be useful, and without any
counterattack. If they attack our center we, having the center battery

book. “It is a ray of light in the darkness, a shade between sadness

conservatory and pantry into the large marble dining hall, where tables
to go home on leave. Why he had to go he did not know; but after his
“Today—it was the same affair. Oh, Mary, don’t remind me of it!” and
father’s wish—to propose, and postpone the wedding for a year.
of his trap. A French cook accused of being a spy was being flogged. The
sides, like the roar of the sea, were heard the rattle of wheels, the
“We here in Moscow are more occupied with dinner parties and scandal
now he again seemed to be saying the same words to her, only in her
crimson float on the surface of that milky sea of mist. The whole French
“Aren’t you cold?” he asked.
all his own simple relations with her. Urged on by Ramballe’s questions
“Form column! Prepare to charge!”
But the baggage trains stretched out so that the last of Beauharnais’

he. “Laughing at us old fellows!”


The events of the previous year: the burning of Moscow and the flight
had witnessed without taking notice of them—assumed in Karatáev’s a
out her cambric handkerchief she began wiping her husband’s waistcoat.
And so without particularly analyzing all the contiguous sections of
Prince Vasíli looked questioningly at the princess, but could not make
they contain; for how can we, miserable sinners that we are, know the
entrusted to his care and whom he intended to benefit.

and only turned away his eyes when the Austrian chief of staff finished
knew that when it appeared on her face, she became mute and was not to
not dare to. He stood irresolutely beside him in the passage. Then in
Like a somnambulist aroused from her sleep Natásha went out of the room
not to leave their homes and that the French authorities would afford
“Yes, and even tomorrow,” replied her brother.



event have been executed, we forget about the others that were not
said she in French, displaying her bag and addressing all present.
those first steps. Both had changed greatly since they last met and both
voice and the rustle of a silk dress behind the door. Several times on
the other men in the room, her anxiety could only have reference to
whether the guests had all observed her father’s hostile attitude

the road he was stopped by a French sentinel who ordered him back.
in a hoarse broken voice, with an arm thrown round the nearest soldier.
you’ve had to take,” cried he.
CHAPTER XV
unnoticed glance at little seven-year-old Nicholas, who was sitting in
right.
on the left, near which some troops could be seen.
The gray-haired valet was sitting drowsily listening to the snoring of
to hand the squadron over to the next in seniority and appear before
riding away, say to Czartorýski: “What a terrible thing war is: what
even if Moscow were taken, for him to remain there and do what he was
to him which to Prince Andrew seemed so natural, namely, that it is


unconsciously carried away and began speaking with the suppressed
came the strange sound of a few voices shouting. Instantly as at a
of which his wife’s nightcap was visible and her sleepy breathing
the French were fleeing toward Smolénsk, there were hundreds of such
movement and long ago foreseen its result.
“What can happen?”
“The count’s books.”
dinner and the potatoes are grand!”
admirable young woman and you always liked her, but now suddenly you
the militia in the yeah ‘seven? All that did was to enwich the pwiests’
equality. Have people since the Revolution become happier? On the
girl. But your cousin, Drubetskóy, is also very attentive to her. They
Cossacks of Dokhtúrov’s detachment reported having sighted the French
his letters and papers. Mademoiselle Bourienne would do the honors of
his shirt, and sobbed so that I could not calm him for a long time.

it a weaker phenomenon is taken as the cause of a stronger. The sum of
The handsome boy adjutant with the long hair sighed deeply without
congratulations and greetings from acquaintances that met him on all
listened to his regular breathing. The dark shadow was Princess Mary,

and brighter with an old man’s mild smile, which drew the corners of his
shouts of thousands of voices. His horse and the horse of the hussar

    * “I love you.”
they’re getting it frightfully hot.”
entering the Brotherhood was merely to be intimate and in favor with
till that moment he had not been thinking of Kurágin, all his unexpended
    * (2) “Hurrah for the Austrians! Hurrah for the Russians!
CHAPTER XIII
the neck, she kissed her on the throat. In her behavior to her mother
In Anna Pávlovna’s circle only those Frenchmen were admitted who were
coldly it seemed to Natásha. “Go... go,” said the mother, sadly and
“Dieu sait quand reviendra.” hummed the prince out of tune and, with
answer he sought. L’russe Besuhof made 666. This discovery excited him.
walls. In the middle stood what were probably a king and a queen. The

subdivisions of tendencies and parties:
The conflagration, at which he had looked with so much indifference the

and blocking the streets and alleys, while endless masses of troops were
errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a
Balashëv told him why he considered Napoleon to be the originator of the
the enormously high study door opened and showed the figure of a rather
broken up, but the Russian army retreated immediately after the
was suddenly heard from both sides. The corporal frowned at Pierre’s
burying the dead—where the battle was you know—well, those dead had been
The servants—the most reliable judges of their masters because they
this same room was dimly lighted by two candles. On one small table tea
prancing horse had splashed mud over some foot soldiers.
“Don’t, Natásha! Pray to God. ‘Marriages are made in
among whom was Pierre. On the twenty-second of October that party was
the responsibility for all that happens. A sovereign should not be with
last,” she went on, turning her eyes from Pierre to her companion with a
were solely engaged in sacrificing themselves, saving their fatherland,


ready, the stranger opened his eyes, moved to the table, filled a
the morning. In this letter she said briefly that all their
support me in the path of virtue. In his presence doubt has no place.
opinion.
The count was delighted at Anna Mikháylovna’s taking upon herself one
To explain the conditions of that relationship we must first establish a
distinguish a living body from a dead one, Napoleon from the Poklónny
befallen his son.

within a few days. Princess Mary and the old prince each bore and hid
a result of this, he galloped up to the wolf just when she had been
reply to the former question, but by her image. When he listened to, or
“They are bringing her, our Protectress!... The Iberian Mother of God!”



the voice of an old maidservant saying, “Straight, straight, along the
seclusion.
one and again became separate and again blended, now into solemn church
lances and the unfolded standards fluttered against their staffs. It
And it occurs to no one that to admit a greatness not commensurable with
“Do you know? You’d really better drop it all. There’s still

From the right side of his abdomen, blood was welling out making a large
without reason, addressing her stiffly as “my dear,” and using the
yet with a hope for the fulfillment of her forbidden earthly longing)
Alexandre, La nation russe and added up their numbers, but the sums
maintained, when men were taken into that region of death where


archduke’s as good as another, as you know) and even if it is only

wish or not to be Prince Anatole Kurágin’s wife? Reply: yes or no,”


arrangements, the count grew quite tranquil.
     * “Long live Henry the Fourth, that valiant king! That rowdy
exploit?”


between the officers, came close to Denísov, and said:
“Why not?” Dólokhov answered absently, scrutinizing the face of the
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
there many more of you to come?”
Count Ostermann-Tolstóy met the returning hussars, sent for Rostóv,

recognize, she did not even recognize her own daughters, or her late

leave you cold a thousand times and the thousand and first time thrill

I,” and he raised his foot to the stirrup.
large leather sofa from Prince Andrew’s study into the bedroom. On
foot, and galloped on.

seated them on the center sofa. The bigwigs, the most respected members
for instance as all those which led the French armies to Russia, is
Next day, the army began its campaign, and up to the very battle of
flow from the same sources—the circumstances of his birth, education,
shouted something breathlessly with emphatic intonations and gestures.
property is promptly punished. His Majesty the Emperor and King protects
Raévski’s tender paternal feelings when their own skins were in danger?

recovered, and Rostóv became very friendly with him during his
was not destroyed, gleamed white in the distance with its towers and
midnight. Prince Andrew went out.
stream, and the Uhlans caught hold of one another as they fell off their
to distraction! One learns many things then,” she added with a certain
Pierre rushed to the wing, but the heat was so great that he
CHAPTER XVIII

that friendship?” remarked the count in an inquiring tone.

on the frightened, exhausted, and hesitating men, as if to say: “Enough,

neck instead.
for reinforcements and all said that the Russians were holding their
an army—to bar its road—is quite impossible, for there is always plenty
should not trust them absolutely, but should also listen to what Pfuel’s
important post in Vienna. Both the foreign minister and our ambassador



gentleman—evidently not sharing Borís’ conception of the advantages
was heard to “mount” and the soldiers crossed themselves and mounted.
The aim of the Russian army was to pursue the French. The road the
remains of supper. A footman, thinking no one saw him, was drinking on
of suppleness and especially of firmness and endurance.
addressed, though he was sorry for the wounded, resolutely refused,
related to the will of one or of several men who have decreed it.


sober mirth as radiated from Anísya Fëdorovna’s whole being. Anísya


Hard as it was for Sónya, she watched her friend and did not let her
Prince Andrew.

and advanced during the night. It was an autumn night with dark purple
again it sounded as if someone were walking on detonators and exploding
The Rostóv party spent the night at Mytíshchi, fourteen miles from
than anything else showed Pierre her superiority. She was right in
words a meaning he had perhaps not intended.
and his hair pomaded.

their memory: “These wretches had occupied the sacred citadel, having
CHAPTER I
today for the Emperor.” Dolgorúkov smiled significantly.
Princess Mary’s wish from the cupboard where he had been confined, was

Willarski felt dull in Orël and was pleased to meet a man of his own
entered the room. Prince Vasíli approached first, and she kissed the
CHAPTER IV
she was always imagining that. It always seemed to her that everyone
To solve the question of how freedom and necessity are combined and
the Emperor Alexander has surrounded himself with my personal enemies.
who for some unknown reason threatened to trample them under his horse’s
count and countess respectfully conversing with the prior, who was

As she was crossing the anteroom she saw through the window a carriage
of troops took part, we might treat it as an exception; but this event
that had tormented him all dinnertime rose and took possession of him.
She was twenty-seven. After the death of her brothers she had become

on the other side, the children, tutors, and governesses. From behind

called genius that people are so apt to ascribe to Napoleon; yet the
exasperated whisper, evidently meaning to wound his sister.
Apráksina...” and then, again rustling, pass into the anteroom, put
    CHAPTER IX
hung a signboard, GENERAL STAFF, and throwing down his reins, he entered
submissive general.
excited by it.
worn face. Alpátych told how he had been sent there and how difficult it
to Napoleon again, to Charles X, to Louis Philippe, to a Republican

“A petition? This way, to the officer on duty” (he was shown the
this card and I’ll take my cap and drive home to supper with Denísov,
And as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman, his portly form
the Mother of God to the wounded in the Catherine Hospital where we will
part, still less on his, or even to the kind of tender, self-conscious,
With reference to commerce, the proclamation to industrious workmen and
whole army it is still uncertain whether he is alive or not. I comfort

containing lessons in geometry written by himself and drew up a chair
“Oh, those Moscow gossips!” said Dólokhov, and he took up the cards
Rapp replied that he had given the Emperor’s order about the rice, but
“And was our militia of any use to the Empia? Not at all! It only wuined
The Project Gutenberg EBook of War and Peace, by Leo Tolstoy

war had terminated so fortunately. Pfuel barely glanced—not so much at
circumstances, society, and race—by that elemental force against which

capitals, he still continued to live in the country, remarking that
that nothing had happened and asked him not to worry. Márya Dmítrievna
CHAPTER VI
And how frightened he was! He thought that I should kill him. Why should
packed as compactly as possible.
that here was a real comrade in her grief, and consequently a friend.
“Now then, catch hold in twos! Hand up the lever! That’s it.... Where

provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
measured tones of a man who intends to tell a long story, “that our name
they be ensnared when they know it not, and may the plots they have laid
quiet authority, “you wish to insult me, and I am ready to agree with
sat down to table every day. These were all their own people who had
defending us—doing it very badly, I think, but still he is defending
by the terrible pallor of the princess’ face that looked out at him from
but it was too late. She was looking at them with an expression they
On entering the earthwork he noticed that there were men doing something
“It’s not that I don’t remember—I know what he is like, but not
groaned, sighed, wept, screamed, swore, or asked for vodka. Some were
your disposal.”
his opponents, the frankness of his falsehoods, and the dazzling and

“Aah!” Rostóv almost screamed lifting both hands to his head. The
said Repnín.
Natásha’s prediction proved true. Dólokhov, who did not usually care
battle, and while we were looking for the French—having lost touch with
“No, tell them to bring a small table out here, my dear boy. I’ll look
such orders were given by the officers on the spot nearest to the
fellow,” he said abruptly and eagerly, “I must confess to having
Bourienne, whom she had of late kept at a distance, but who yet was
young ladies. “I can just imagine what a funny figure that policeman
by. Pierre caught a glimpse of a man in a three-cornered hat with a
on educational methods. They were for the most part quite insignificant
that we must all become like her, and that they were glad to yield to

unusual was happening around him, did not realize that he was

“And your children?”
Nicholas.
poured drops from a medicine bottle into a wineglass half full of water.
the better, so much the better, Monsieur Pierre! Terrible in battle...

Pierre’s direction with a frown and ordered him to be led away. But
at the Razumóvski’s ball ... and Countess Apráksina ... I was
Whatever happens and whoever may stand at the head of affairs, the
“Heavens! I was quite forgetting!” he suddenly cried. “I have some
a man who on a hot day takes a final run before plunging into the water.
passing Bagratión and racing one another they rushed in an irregular
the room where Khvóstikov and Makárin were sitting.


admit—he had almost been jealous on his wife’s account, was the butt
given his name, announced that he had to communicate to his Serene
felt that there was no more to be said.
CHAPTER XIV

horse for which he had paid seven hundred rubbles was not worth half
life’s turmoil, for in his mind the memory of Joseph Alexéevich was
her.
are you shoving to?”
to her by the hood. “Foo! You are cold! Now take off your things,
as the prince is unwell my advice is that they should go to Moscow. I am
comprehension.
husband’s, dressing gowns and uniforms, which they had put on.
“What can he say? Tra-di-ri-di-ra and so on... merely to gain time.
the desire for revenge that lay in the heart of every Russian as long as
and Bennigsen some diamonds and a hundred thousand rubles, others also
Kutúzov’s face as he stood in the open doorway remained perfectly
seen him in Petersburg. I saw him just as I see you.... There he sat in
That assumption would destroy the possibility of the existence of laws,
“And I?” he said; “do you think it is easier for me? I am as worn
Timókhin crept along the bench to him.
the others. But no: the answers he had given when questioned had come
She finished her game of patience and only then examined the presents.
the very middle of it, some strange airy structure was being erected out
unpleasant.

He seemed to swell with satisfaction. He had hardly finished speaking

ground, eager to rejoin its fellows, he watched his squadron draw
Prince Andrew without replying took out a notebook and raising his knee
The day before the count was to return, Sónya noticed that Natásha sat


this couch will be my grave?” Natásha, flushed and eager, seeing
soil and not to retreat. The enormous Drissa camp was formed on Pfuel’s
the will of one man or of several men.
Among the Russian prisoners rescued by Denísov and Dólokhov was Pierre
losses but kindling hatred of the foe. Napoleon advanced farther and we
With reference to army discipline, orders were continually being issued


their former friendly relations.
At the entrance to the Arbát Square an immense expanse of dark starry
The peasants—even they have to go,” said the soldier behind the cart,
previous traditions of war. The burning of towns and villages, the

“Your Majesty,” replied Balashëv, “my master, the Emperor, does not
to avoid his old acquaintances with their commiseration and offensive

When, awakened from his sleep, he received that cold, peremptory note

addressed the horseman with the white plumes, evidently suggesting
made. Prince Andrew several times prompted Pierre’s story of what he
diplomatic difficulties and ends the military movement of that period of
beings in whom the Deity—the Supreme Power if you prefer the term—is
Rostóv.

and we are told of many geniuses and heroes of that period of the
had settled down beside her under the quilt, spread out her arms, and
syllable, “and if you like I can put you in touch with him.” He
Pierre wished to reply, but could not get in a word. He felt that his

for dear Véra’s sake.”
moving from the battlefield.
raised and arms folded on his stomach. On the other side sat Count
“At seven o’clock? It’s very sad, very sad!”
expedition and vividly picturing to himself what would happen next day.
did not see that, he saw her shining eyes which were beautiful. They
the number of cannon or of slaughtered men, but by that intangible force
blessing on Thy humble people, and graciously hear us, spare us, and
taken, it was not his fault but the corporal’s who had sent him to
particularly those who had lately joined. These according to Pierre’s
my empire. It still offers me more than my enemies suppose,” said the
vent to her anger against Anatole in words of abuse, Márya Dmítrievna
emotion. But well as he knew it, Pierre now listened to that tale as to
galloped to the place whence came the sounds of firing and where the


action, as if flying through the air without touching the ground.
But our stories are the stories of men who have been under the enemy’s
    * Lay member of the Society of Jesus.
with the gentle, patronizing intonation natural to a man of importance
only be seen till they had entered the hollow that lay between them and
was saying, and he looked on without interfering. Karatáev thanked the
But not to speak of the intrinsic quality of histories of this kind
name,’ he says. ‘Shout loud at them,’ he says, ‘and you’ll take
Prince Andrew clearly with his arms outside the quilt, and such as she

“I say, fellow countryman! Will they set us down here or take us on to


conservatory to the place among the tubs where she had been hiding.
migrate. He learned from domestic serfs loyal to him that the peasant

that it is more dangerous to run away than to advance, but that Russian
The militiamen, both those who had been in the village and those who had
shoulder, saying something to him in a friendly manner, and Kutúzov with

“Why run risks, Captain? You should dismount,” he said.
On the eve of the Sunday when the special prayer was read, Pierre had
In spite of the trampling of the French gendarmes’ horses, which

lightly, more lightly, and yet more lightly whirled the count, flying
as he said this. She seemed to be trying to fathom the hidden meaning of



“Gentlemen!” said the Emperor with a quivering voice.
fire and sometimes even entered it—repeatedly led into it huge masses of
her strangely, not understanding.
directed on the internal changes that were being undertaken in all the
walked—as women can walk—with the more repose and stateliness the
lay a long time in her mother’s bed gazing straight before her. She
Ostermann, Rostóv, remembering that he had charged without orders,
attentively at Natásha.

she said rapidly.... She glanced at him.
lessons, was always breaking things in the house and making himself a
he had used to Alexander himself at Tilsit. “All that, he would have
apologize to an old and honorable officer? Whatever Bogdánich may
and wait for her, she went silently toward the door that everyone was
muskets of the nearest soldiers. The soldiers started firing without
Zhilínski, a Pole brought up in Paris, was rich, and passionately

latter came in late that night. “I did not expect this! I did not think
saying that he must prostrate himself at the Gates of the Temple.
Pierre had not eaten all day and the smell of the potatoes seemed
Pierre glanced absently at Natásha and was about to say something, but
All seriously thinking historians have involuntarily encountered this
the darkness. He was continually imagining that a cannon ball was flying
with difficulty.
“Ah, what have you done to me?” it still seemed to say, and Prince
*** START: FULL LICENSE ***
settled into three groups. One, chiefly masculine, had formed round
shouting and loading him with gross abuse. Another man, Captain Brózin,
the process of regeneration had already taken place in him, and I rushed
next note, the next phrase, and everything in the world was divided into

things each from his own point of view. This legitimate peculiarity of
of occurrences; but each command follows from another, and never refers
    CHAPTER XXIII

commander’s will, owing to the tact Bagratión showed, his presence


During this transfer he felt a little stronger and was able to look
to get married,” he added rather more quickly, as if pleased at having
she had spoken to Hippolyte in the drawing room and which was so plainly

presence. Yet sooner or later it had to be, and she went in. The sobs
CHAPTER VI
for a battle had not yet expressed itself strongly enough, and because

chemical elements of dissolution.
indifferent air, and glanced into the little drawing room. Pierre and
empty, he looked angrily at his informant, turned away, and silently
a merry sparkle in his eyes.
again and remained for a while with the Ismáylov regiment.
standing up, on which lay an open exercise book, and the lathe with

and my wife’s friends.” (He smiled still more pleasantly.) “I
of enterprise which always accompany the opening of a campaign.
or you as having been at all insulted, and as a man older than you, my
very glad to see him hanged, but I was sorry for my father—that again
good-by!” and she left the room.
After sunset the wind had dropped. The night was calm and fresh. Toward
“Why do they want to make her sing? How can she sing? There’s
were burning and pictures of knights with short beards hung on the
had been admitted. Had he not told her, yes, told her to make a list,
with respectful jocularity to remark that there is no reason for not


“I have met loving, noble, high-minded men, but I have not yet met
Happy as Pétya was, he felt sad at having to go home knowing that all
Natásha’s face and eyes would have to tell her all more clearly and
liked to. He looked inquiringly at his monitress and saw that she was

supper for his French friends. The guest of honor was an aide-de-camp of
of the chimney stacks and tumble-down walls of the burned-out quarters
fields or on the threshing floor, he returned from the sowing or mowing
“So that’s what I’m sorry for—human dignity, peace of mind,
or sitting, jolted over the stones that had been thrown on the steep

spend that night at a place three miles out of Moscow. The next morning
and the burning of an arm with a ruler as a proof of love did not seem
had replied that she could give no directions about state institutions
When Nicholas and his wife came to look for Pierre he was in the nursery


“And what’s your name?”
Natásha did not remember how that day passed nor that night, nor the
Hills. That’s all the same to him! That’s what I was saying to you—those

smiling face, moved after Willarski with uncertain, timid steps.

division’s regiments, and battalions by heart.

that his remarks were too enthusiastic and emphatic for the occasion and
Though in Moscow the Rostóvs belonged to the best society without
“that Dólokhov was my lover,” she said in French with her coarse
the men (the commanders, as we saw at the council of war, were out of
with a bottle wrapped in a napkin passed him by. He frowned, trying to
What force moves the nations?
commander in chief and Lanskóy, who was in charge of the commissariat
“On account of your spells of ill health, will your excellency please
Whatever you tell me, I will do. Tell me....”
Had he screamed in agony, that scream would not have struck such horror
outside, and flames were visible through the cracks of the shed, but
had at the opera—gratified vanity at his admiration of her and fear at

found the Cossacks, inquired for the regiment operating with Plátov’s
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
repress a smile.
result from it—no longer seemed to be in the future but in the past.
“Well then, that’s excellent,” said he. “We’ll talk it over


have to choose, and I can’t be happy without either of them. Only,”
CHAPTER XVI
place of the luxury and comfort to which he was accustomed, to sleep
him occurred to his mind. The Russians might fall on his left wing,
more carts and carriages, and the Rostóvs were being shouted at to move
the uplifted whip meant that he saw a sitting hare.)
When Napoleon, having finished speaking, looked inquiringly at the

The soldiers simply held their sides as they watched him.

unoccupied and to place troops below it. Some of the generals expressed

for his reply, surrounded him, and led him to the drawing room. It was
while he tried to prove to Pierre that in his actions there was no
with quick angry steps, looked hastily around as if seeking someone.
ignorance, or evil intention in every deviation from that theory. To
mention her!” he exclaimed fiercely.
Princess Mary asked Mademoiselle Bourienne’s pardon, and also her
challenging those who did not agree with him to duels, thereby proving
“I see someone with a mustache,” said Natásha, seeing her own face.
glad, very glad indeed, that my brother has distinguished himself so.
“What about capitulation?”
on which with a broken bit of chalk he had written “800 rubles” in
downward. When Pierre came up the count was gazing straight at him, but
    CHAPTER XXXIII
crowds of people had rapturously greeted and followed him. From all

and how the well-trained horse looked round unconcerned and did not



The road along which they moved was bordered on both sides by dead
out what he said.
municipality or city government. It will take care of you, of your
Claparède’s, and even an obvious inconvenience and delay in stopping
thing we are interested in here,” said the spirit of the place.
cause, which by the fact of its being unconditioned and unlimited would
“Count Lichtenfels was here this morning,” Bilíbin continued,
rapidly moving hands, and he could clearly see the thoughtful profile
because he ordered it; strange as these suppositions appear, yet human
(without knowing what he was jesting at) when he saw that the Massacre

examining and the judgment upon it, that period will be finite, while
pipe, now for the first time recognized the old Natásha. A flood of
one word after another, came through the open door. She was speaking as
Prince Vasíli rose. “Oh!” said he with reproach and surprise,
good stories about her, while none the less all without exception

horses neighing. The secrecy of the undertaking heightened its charm
“Hm!—his excellency is a puppy.... I got him his appointment in the
“You cannot know me, General, I have never seen you...”
on Denísov’s behalf. He could not himself go to the general in

stood with his marshals around him, it was quite light. Above him was
any reasoned cause, makes a man contented with himself and disposed to

makes things trying for you, doesn’t it?” Prince Andrew asked
in the military profession, so to an even greater extent Bilíbin gave
And you may argue about that as you like!”
“And I love her, because her character is sensible and very good.
Several of the field galloped to the spot where the fight was going on.

of personal success; his mind, however, was occupied by the different
large divisions with staffs also knew of this convoy and, as Denísov
predetermined, and that wriggle as he might, he would be what all in
experienced driver knew it was better to hold the whip raised as a
justifying himself, and unable to understand Rostóv’s outburst,
trees, and the hissing of the saber, “Ozheg-zheg-zheg...” and again the
killed?... You may go and kill whom you please, but I don’t want to do
demands were sent from Petersburg for Kutúzov to take his army that
Véra—mentioning “our days” as people of limited intelligence are
by the will of one man—Peter the Great—and that France from a republic
Sónya’s costume was the best of all. Her mustache and eyebrows were
thud of the enemy’s cannon balls, from the flushed and perspiring
“Oh well... it can’t be helped!” said he in a tone of vexation and


Nicholas set off, following the first sleigh; behind him the others





Her words were incoherent, but they attained the purpose at which she
he would either make his father consent to this marriage and love her,
to deal with. A young officer of the Horse Guards, Kutúzov’s orderly,

assist. My tongue is my enemy. Brothers G. V. and O. visited me and we
government in Russia, or a Revolution in France and a subsequent
alive! We have a house of our own in Moscow, but it’s a long way from
did not take her eyes off her husband. Nicholas and Denísov rose, asked
the ground with his hand. The other generals followed his example,
contrary were generally morally weaker than any of the millions they
For military science to say this is like defining momentum in mechanics
betrayal of the Bourbon cause. The sovereigns! Why, they are sending

Drissa, Prince Andrew visited Bald Hills which was directly on his way,
sitting and dropped onto it, covering his face with his hand. Pierre


still in course of construction. Round the house was a garden newly laid
passed, and at the cost of that temporary unpleasantness he had obtained
and all those idiotic societies!” Natásha declared of the very affairs
coward like Arakchéev, he was as precise, as cruel, and as unable to
differential of history, that is, the individual tendencies of men) and
workman suddenly sank down on the cords that held him, how blood showed
went on, with a somber and scornful smile. “And thou art more foolish
said Rostóv, blushing.


not notice the sound of the bullets whistling from every side, or the

“Your excellency,” said he in German, stepping forward and
Left alone, Pierre went on smiling in the same way. Once or twice
     * (2) “Of a charming woman, as witty as she is lovely.”
Rostóv.
“Well, and all this idiocy—Gossner and Tatáwinova?” Denísov asked. “Is
it!”
distance where no one had been before him. Bagratión called to him from
poor Amélie’s happiness, she loves him so passionately, and so
Napoleon’s generals—Davout, Ney, and Murat, who were near that region of
Dólokhov and was about to ride away, but Pétya seized hold of him.

etc. And as usual nothing happened in accord with the disposition.
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.

he understood it all, though he really did not understand anything of
consists in these historians do not say, or if they do they continually
chance. I see a force producing effects beyond the scope of ordinary
service was being held in the churches as usual. Alpátych went to the
demonstration of freedom.
driving into the court of Count Bezúkhov’s house. As the wheels
spectacles in her presence, fumbling near them and not seeing them, or
immediately diverted by an exclamation at the other side of the table.
getting ready and again boiled some muddy water in the samovar. But
sudden exile and alleged treachery had just reached Moscow.


sensibly and quietly with one another.
in an historic event never understands its significance. If he tries to
distraught yet angry expression on the faces of these two men, who
mistress—entered the room inaudibly but hurriedly and with a beaming
and sheepskin coats, was short of provisions and without vodka, and

“Your Papa must be told, though,” said Mávra Kuzmínichna.
And not letting them interrupt her she went on to tell what she had

back or my sides: as they have grown so I stand, and I do not believe in

part where the current was swift. Hundreds of Uhlans galloped in after

and that we were led into error by the fact that we ourselves were


“O, Natásha!” Sónya suddenly almost screamed, catching her companion’s

get hot... by heaven!... There he is!... Vive l’Empereur! So these

With regard to commerce and to provisioning the army, the following was
Pierre was as if intoxicated. His elation increased at the sight of the
cloth-covered, sheepskin coat and new boots, an old woman of similar
supposed.
time. Sónya alone directed the practical side of matters by getting
What, me? Me? My immortal soul? Ha-ha-ha! Ha-ha-ha!...” and he laughed
Kutúzov was occupying a nobleman’s castle of modest dimensions near
as he had been and his health was poor (the old man laid special stress
buttermilk cakes, such aromatic jam, such honey-and-nut sweets, or such
demand he made up his mind that he must have recourse to artifice when
we? No?”
man.... Here he is, and the count has not once asked for him.”

covered trap. Several times Rostóv, covering his head, tried to go
evil. Le prochain—your Kiev peasants to whom you want to do good.”
Natásha, “and they say there was no Negro at all. But you see, you

Dron suddenly fell on his knees.

by cunning, she would have spoiled her case by acknowledging herself
misfortune has driven from the city, and you scattered tillers of


“Princess Yusúpova wore one exactly like this,” said Berg, pointing
everything in his own way.
straight into his eyes, and his nearness, self-assurance, and the
“And what is she so pleased about?” thought Nicholas, looking at his
and parched lips and dry fixed eyes, she sat at the window, uneasily
twist about as you may, you will have to come to Bennigsen eventually.
Having sat awhile with her visitors without understanding anything of

awkward and uncomfortable, and her burden oppressed her now more than
“I say so,” he continued desperately, “because the Bourbons fled
And the corporal leaned against the door and offered Pierre his pipe,
“We knew nothing of it when we started from Moscow. I did not dare to
impossible to stop them,” he reported.
Willarski was silent throughout the drive. To Pierre’s inquiries as
    CHAPTER III
to tell contained the chief charm and the whole meaning of his story:
merely to avoid responsibility or to please the Emperor, would declare
feeling of life being possible only in each other’s presence.

entrenched under the enemy’s fire, if they have nothing to do, try
beautiful Hélène, whose eyes several times met those of the handsome
“First, notepaper—do you hear? Eight quires, like this sample,

“Never mind what it’s for....”

when as yet they were nothing to one another; they felt themselves
voice.
wet with the night’s rain; the drooping branches of the birches, also
what can be done with two hundred and thirty rubles! I even manage to

That evening the Rostóvs went to the Opera, for which Márya
the front, but at Dürrenstein, where I was, our attack began after
blocking the way for everyone. The countess tried to make him talk,
Natásha, who had long expected to be fetched to nurse her baby, now
highest class, respected by everyone. All the kings, except the Chinese,

know me and my relations with Father. I want nothing from him. I have
marriage, Natásha’s love for his best friend, her betrayal of him, and
the point. Between ourselves, mon cher, do you belong to the Masons?” he
and you’ll see.”
asylums, and schools were to be established on all the estates. Some of
French troops who are being raised in France will join us, and the peace
advanced noiselessly, only occasionally a jingling of the artillery
Natásha remained alone and, from the time Princess Mary began making

a given direction the animals transfer their will to the animals that
love for a woman, his father’s death, and the French invasion which had
CHAPTER XXI
crowd understood the whole tremendous significance of what was
When he had reported himself to the commander of the regiment and had
brothers,” said he. “Mother Moscow, the white...” his voice faltered,

who made his mark in 1807, and to whom Napoleon himself did justice—a
him that he was already under the command of the German.
turned to the right and reached Málo-Yaroslávets, again without
movement, and those sounds. He turned to look at Kutúzov and his suite,

disillusionment with life, offered him such consolation of friendship


others loved him in the same way.
spellbound by beauty. It was the same panorama he had admired from that

“Yes. Savélich says I must!”
then quickly glanced at Dólokhov and, bending his finger as he had been

Natásha did not let her finish. She drew the countess’ large hand to
“Mother! The dew is cold but clear.... It’s well that I’m a
stranger, asking what he could do for him.
The whistling sound of the runners on the snow and the voices of girls
do if I love him and the other one too?” she asked herself, unable to
“Oh, nothing,” said he, as if weary of being continually asked the
“Don’t do it without me!” called Natásha. “You won’t do it
the gentlemen around.


pointed to the peasants—“asks you to come up to the house.... Won’t
the conversation broke up into insignificant small talk about the last
amiably into his face, evidently wishing to soften the rudeness of his
him a look of stern inquiry, as though what Pierre had just said was

“I say, come round some evening and we’ll have a game of faro!”
Natásha, leaning on her elbow, the expression of her face constantly
with cudgels or with rifles that repeat thirty times a minute. Men

by the softness and flexibility of her small limbs, and by a certain

led him to the house, offered him lunch, and sat down with him. Then,


drew back from the bed, making way for her. He was still lying on the
Having led him about ten paces, Willarski stopped.

could reach, there were the rattle of wheels, the creaking of carts
name so that Nicholas at once understood that Anna Ignátyevna was a very
debts and was obviously not guilty of contracting them.
to signify his approval of them all, and the group increased, dispersed,
“Yes, please do,” said Rostóv.
“Cover yourself!” even Denísov cried to his adversary.
and a quarter away and would receive Balashëv and conduct him to his
“Your Serene Highness!”
looked at that aged, stern, motionless, almost lifeless face and moved
as well as that the French were outflanking our left. The general
Rostóv’s deferential tone seemed to indicate that though he would
pause after this mot to give time for its due appreciation. “The
“All the same I shan’t sleep. What silliness, to sleep! Mummy!
the shed.
But this lasted only a moment. He suddenly frowned, as if blaming


know, but he felt sure it would do so. The locality and the position of
“You’ve only just missed him,” said the orderly.
felt astonished that he could have spent so much time on such useless
wailing.
and if we recognize this unknown quantity in its entirety as being

mown down while still green. The peasants were ruined; some of them too
In dealing with humanity’s inquiry, the science of history up to now
perish. Do they think we’re dogs?” voices in the crowd were heard saying
slain reckoned up, new officers appointed to replace those who had been

“It has begun. Here it is!” thought Prince Andrew, feeling the
pensions and the same amount for asylums; 150,000 alimony was sent to
“Not on any account!” exclaimed Rostóv.
it’s a good thing you’re going. That’s it! Come on!” (This was
“but you used to be different, and...”
west—Paris—and subsides.

“Once she had missed it and turned it away, any mongrel could take
a warlike spirit in the people of the capital—that the Emperor should
Sitting silent and motionless on a heap of straw against the wall,

continued its rhythmic murmur, something oppressed him and stretched
and corn as of his own, and few landowners had their crops sown
connection may be found between the movements of humanity and commerce,
Moscow. As a result he could not go to the country with the rest of the

clearly, impressively, and majestically. But can it be true that I am in
broad face expressed pity and sympathy. This expression irritated Prince
many a man will be missing tomorrow!” he remarked.
is.... That’s what convinces, that is what has convinced me,” said

paces apart, but nevertheless the men were always in one and the same
“If I have time,” answered Nicholas. “But I promised the
asked himself without finding an answer. And suddenly a new unexpected
which Kutúzov afterwards pursued him—this unnecessary retreat along
everything and everybody at last and had spoken such pathetic words to
wife, who had turned pale and was staring fixedly at her son.
Having as it were reviewed her kingdom, tested her power, and made
kind, noble, and splendid, and I could not help loving him. What am I to
shaking with sobs and throbbing against the window frame. Natásha knew
reviews were constantly held and rewards distributed. The Emperor

house and back again, shouting confused instructions to the hurrying
was seized by an agonizing fear. And that fear was the fear of death. It
The band immediately struck up “Conquest’s joyful thunder
“Then what is this blood on the gun carriage?” inquired Túshin.
passed along the road and quickly disappeared amid the trees in the mist
shouting.
“And are you building?”
distinguish any of them and, feeling that she must speak to them all
asking for information.... What are your orders about the Fire Brigade?
had heard that a rumor of his duel had reached the Emperor and that it
people appeared from right and left wearing black cloaks and holding
one finger. The yard porter, his arms akimbo, stood smiling with
The vestibule was filled with the discordant sounds of a struggle and of
Borís remembered Natásha in a short dress, with dark eyes shining from
talk about that,” said Natásha.
attributed to any one man, that no one ever foresaw it, and that in
the feather bed. Natásha began consoling her, but her face showed that
could be felt, but the nearer Prince Andrew came to the French lines the
of awe and even servility. A deference such as he had never before
of the soldiers or of riotous peasants would be terrible.”
was burning as usual. (The boy was afraid of the dark and they could
suite.
the Enns and the Danube became visible, and the rocky left bank of the
hands meekly folded on his knees, sat close to Hélène and, with a



The count sobbed yet more.

doesn’t he come?...”
useless, feeble man.
(signed) Alexander
Weyrother again gave that smile which seemed to say that to him it was

But Dólokhov restarted the conversation which had dropped and began

anything, except only for permission, after the blow she had received,
see her there, but he had failed to recognize her because the change in
imposing and stately appearance one sees in men of forty who live in
After the Emperor had left Moscow, life flowed on there in its usual
“But, my dear princess,” answered Anna Mikháylovna blandly but
    BOOK EIGHT: 1811 - 12

The horses were brought.

through the door.
dry-eyed, occupied with most trivial matters as if not understanding
what is there to oblige him to reply? Write to Pierre, as Prince Andrew
allow himself to think that he was doing good to others for virtue’s
right, shouting and firing were again heard. Flashes of shot gleamed in

wars,” he said.
    CHAPTER VIII
questioned Prince Andrew about the details of his interview with the
unite the meaning of all. To unite all?” he asked himself. “No, not
large, gentle brown eyes were also round.

coming movement and bear the responsibility for all that had to be done.
“Go and choose Denísov. He is a real dancer, a wonder!” he said.
his thought; “but I know you wish to avoid any pretext for finding
that rule.
the light of the fire the slender, handsome figure of a young soldier
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
not two hundred thousand men, and I have three times that number. I give

“No, it can’t be helped, lad,” said the prince. “They’re
be convinced that the will of the historic hero does not control the
Princess Mary, foreseeing no end to this, rose first, and complaining of
nowadays are this size! The other day young Princess Irína Vasílevna
“Yes, yes, I know. Let us go in...” said Pierre and entered the house.
“Read this if you like, Father,” said the princess, blushing still
methodical.”
moonlight, but as soon as they were past the fence, the snowy plain
were to come in line with them, 102 guns in all, were to open fire and
they called “Jackdaw,” a thin little fellow with a sharp nose, rose

closing up more firmly at the danger, continued, while steadily melting


kinds, from monarchs to journalists, who lead the masses. Instead of the
“I hear they are expected very soon,” said Pierre.
“It must be from their food,” said the sergeant major. “They used to
If he is standing before Brünn...”
CHAPTER XIV
him into the sitting room, where they began talking. They hardly gave
to Ryazán he found the country dull; his former pursuits no longer
“You must look for husbands for them whether you like it or not....”
Tíkhon did not like riding, and always went on foot, never lagging
suddenly stopped. Unconsciously she sat up, smoothed her hair, got up,
blue mountains beyond the river, the nunnery, the mysterious gorges, and
The elderly lady was a Princess Drubetskáya, belonging to one of the
“Charming! No, this is really beyond anything, my dear count,” said
He paced up and down for a while and glanced at his notes.
not ask himself why men struggled so about these things when all is so
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
ran back again with his men.
with his right thumb under a button of his uniform, his chest expanded
“and showed me a letter in which the parade of the French in Vienna
And she would go to the nursery to nurse Pétya, her only boy. No one
consciousness. Inevitability without content is man’s reason in its
placing of the guns and looked at the Krémlin through field glasses.
simply, and truly carrying out the great work which saved Russia. But

full purity and strength.

seeing the baggage trains that impeded the army, he was (Thiers says)
last extremity and to defend it, leaving to the commander in chief’s

her frontiers immutable; all future wars purely defensive, all
jacket, she attended to her household affairs, and then she drove out:

“Don’t say such things to me. I am betrothed and love another,”



before commencing negotiations, but in just the same way two months ago

ready to co-operate in promoting all that is reasonable.”

of men can do without the conception of power, the existence of power is
“Then it will mean that I must go to the army,” said Pierre to himself.

What sort of governors are they to do that? They ought to be hanged—the
faces—that of fear. Prince Andrew for the second time asked the
And so it was, for when evening came no carts had been provided. In the
her.
congratulated on his approaching wedding that same Borís with whom

merriest, and most magnanimous of cranks, a heedless, genial nobleman of
way, the rumors current among the people of an invasion by Antichrist,
Natásha, and “Uncle” flew, reckless of where and how they went,
German, in a dressing jacket and nightcap, was sitting on a broad bench
has his own peculiar, personal, novel, complicated disease, unknown to


They threatened and questioned him, but he stuck to that: ‘I made it
“Which one do you want, Ma’am’selle?” said he, screwing up his eyes and
excitedly animated and healthy men.” So thinks, or at any rate

the darkness. This was the last French attack and was met by soldiers
Pierre recalled, counting them on his fingers, he felt already in his
“Bad! But it’s not that, my friend—” said Dólokhov with a
fact.
Pierre smiled, Natásha began to laugh, but Nicholas knitted his brows
“That is all nonsense.” Prince Andrew again interrupted him, “let
Between three and four o’clock in the afternoon Prince Andrew, who

abominable... In my house... horrid girl, hussy! I’m only sorry for her
And receiving the reply that there were more than two hundred churches,
excitement.
wanted to sleep. The gay triumphant shouting of the enemy army had a

his chief aim consisted not in carrying out his design, but in proving
was again nodding. “Come, get on! You shall have three rubles for
strong, healthy, cheerful, and excited, and are surrounded by other such
When the prisoners again went forward Pierre looked round. Karatáev

Schlappanitz and Bellowitz which cover the enemy’s front. For this
meadows, troops, woods, the smoke of campfires, villages, mounds, and
“Why have we stopped? Is the way blocked? Or have we already come up
the half-burned house against which Pierre was leaning.
approaching Tarútino Kutúzov noticed cavalrymen leading their horses to
at which she had been listening.
accompanied them on foot as far as the bridge that could not be crossed,

“It did me so much good to tell all about it today. It was hard and
The Emperor entered the Cathedral of the Assumption. The crowd spread

was necessary to await provisions, or that the men had no boots—was so
Ivánovich. He is in a very bad humor, very morose. Be prepared.”

at the foot of the hill, jostled and overtook one another, waving their
“Supper, it’s time for supper! And here are the gypsies!”
“Well, your excellency, what? Your excellency! But what about your
metaphysics.

of it. If the whole activity of the leaders serves as the expression of
this terrible cudgel which regardless of the rules of military science
“Well, then, go back to the army,” he said, drawing himself up to his
Theodore Vasílyevich my course of action would have been quite
of Bonaparte, encountering a population that was unfriendly to it,
the Vilkavisski forest and flowing over the three bridges thrown across

hostess look toward the door, and now and then glance at one another,
thought Rostóv. He knew what a shock he would inflict on his father and
weak, and others had died for want of fodder. It seemed that no horses
Cossack with sleeves rolled up was chopping some mutton. In the room


to his study with the wet nurse and little Prince Nicholas (as his
dozen leashes of smart borzois, agriculture, neighbors, service by

“How is that?” the Emperor interrupted him, frowning sternly. “Would
in words. She had become convinced of it at her last interview with
It had been raining since morning and had seemed as if at any moment it
both the magnate and the prince were there, and both claimed their

“Where is he?” she asked again, addressing them all.
enjoyment by sympathy with anyone’s sorrow,” she felt, and she said
guilt suddenly becomes terribly serious when the other is no longer



his face, paused in front of Pierre and, not noticing his sad look,
asked again in French, looking around and meeting Pierre’s eyes. Pierre
ourselves.... That is the least we can do!”
The count and Simon galloped out of the wood and saw on their left a
“Yes, wait a bit,” said Denísov, glancing round at the officers,


Denísov, now a general on the retired list and much dissatisfied with
his hand over the thin grizzled strands of hair combed back across his
dinner, and we’ll set to work. We will do, completely do, and undo these
CHAPTER XXXIX

day, especially by the mysterious fulfillment she had just seen of her
know nothing about it. Tell General Barclay from me that his information
have done for us.”
the Rostóvs, and Natásha, very glad of this diversion, having shut

Sónya read all that the countess meant to convey with these words. Those
To have one’s ear pulled by the Emperor was considered the greatest
Daniel Teréntich made no reply, and again for a long time they were all
knew of Prince Andrew, who also was evidently no favorite of hers, the


bulk with evident ease.
opposed so illegal an intention) but simply that the unfortunate and
again.
something for itself—he submissively fulfilled the cruel, sad, gloomy,
with his wife sat down at the long table laid for twenty persons, at
said he, standing before Princess Mary and turning red, but not taking
“Very,” said Pierre.
father and Andrew. I shall be so happy when she is his wife. She is so
more. The host and hostess, who had already been standing at the door
vodka a quarter of an hour before, he saw everywhere the same rapid
agreement co-operate to confirm that power. Chance forms the characters

fired it suddenly became as bright as noon. He galloped to the bridge.
“Ah, the standards!” said Kutúzov, evidently detaching himself with
in their conflicts with one another is expressed in wars, and that as a


something more.
“There now! Confess that this is delightful,” said he. “This
“It’s here, close by,” said she and, running across the yard, opened a
you did gain a brilliant victory, if even the Archduke Karl gained a
A little ahead of them walked a peasant guide, wet to the skin and
or would do without his consent; then he marveled at the feeling that
removed her hand. “Tell me, Mamma! He’s nice?”
touching Natásha’s shoulders. “Come, lie down.”
did not wish to believe it and insisted on having it confirmed by Pierre
thing he would have to unite his fate with hers. He might perhaps have
Márya Dmítrievna, curved his arms, beat time, straightened his

guessing by the sounds of the battle and by Scherbínin’s looks that the


for a long time, always in the same fog, descending and ascending hills,


Denísov?”
way through the crowd, went out of the drawing room and reappeared a
the accurate way characteristic of him, was building a little pyramid of
a dream in which a man fancies that a ruffian is coming to attack him,
but Prince Andrew interrupted her by answering her intended question,

Her glittering eyes, filled with childlike fear and excitement, rested
large continent.


of difficulties that might be encountered, as well as fresh people who
pectoris.”

will certainly happen!” thought Pierre, glancing at those dazzling

die means that I, a particle of love, shall return to the general and
Pierre. The satisfaction of his hunger and the wine rendered the captain
journey itself, forgetting its object. But as she approached Yaroslávl
history and predestined from eternity.

was all the harder for the Emperor to turn it elsewhere. Amid the
and we haven’t stretchers, or bunks, or dressers, or doctors enough for
Prince Andrew’s regiment was among the reserves which till after one
Thiers eloquently recounts, he ordered his soldiers to be paid in forged
as well as several droll incidents from his recollections of Germany,

happened, he was said to be insanely jealous and subject like his
“Trakh-ta-ta-takh!” came the frequent crackle of musketry, but it was
“I don’t say it’s a plan I approve of,” said the son; “I am
Drubetskóy lived there. Borís, hearing a strange voice in the
“Believe me, Prince, a mother’s heart will never forget what you
trifles, but did not seem so to the mother or to the father either, now
his horse, supposing the affair to be over. But when he saw that the
last dryly spoken words: “I will detain you no longer, General; you
trying only to be ahead of the others; but just at the bridge, not


without any aim at self-sacrifice, and he therefore looked at what was
doing and might have thrown up everything and run away anywhere.

The patches grew deeper on her forehead, neck, and cheeks. She tried to
“Well, supposing I do love him?” thought Princess Mary.
get away!” and then, turning to the soldiers, shouted:
glowing eyes and his resolute gait, the terrible indications of that
“But I heard,” said Natásha. “Why does Mamma object?”

Moscow, 17th November
fate of the capital and of your empire! Russia will shudder to learn of

Again Rostóv looked intently into Borís’ eyes and sighed. Berg
the Uhlan interrupted Denísov.
In Brünn everybody attached to the court was packing up, and the heavy
pleasures than allow himself to be seen in a shabby equipage or appear
events then occuring lay in the national feeling which he possessed in
Chubby little Dokhtúrov was listening attentively with eyebrows
and thoughtful for a good while, told me his view of the matter, which
possessor of the finest fortune in Russia. It is rumored that Prince
the younger men, but with this difference, that he saw thousands of
feel I am not the same and it troubles me. A wonderful boy, but I am

wonder-working icon of the Holy Mother of God has been revealed.’ On
the situation to be intolerable and went to have an explanation with his
attraction to the earth, because its stalk withers, because it is dried
And Pétya gave the Cossack a detailed account not only of his ride but

their battery a milk-white cloud arose. Then came the distant report of

wounded—some known to Pierre and some unknown—Russians and French,
whether she ought to write, tormented her. Now that he was already an
“He is the enemy of mankind!” cried another. “Allow me to speak....”

The cadet was Rostóv. With one hand he supported the other; he was
Pétya did not know how long this lasted: he enjoyed himself all the

corner of one of your carts! I have nothing here with me.... I shall be
“What are you doing!” she cried vehemently. “He is dying and you
his own helplessness. At sight of this smile Pierre felt an unexpected

On Hélène’s name day, a small party of just their own people—as
CHAPTER VIII
and that I could not help loving him. Yes, his slave! Whatever he orders
“Well, it’s as you like,” said the staff captain. “And what has
“Why should you be ashamed?”
blood-stained smith stood beside him with a gloomy face. A drone of
timidly from behind the backs of the generals. As he stepped past the
CHAPTER XIV
withdraw his troops beyond the Vistula and to restore the duchy of
considering it his duty to rouse the courage of the men and to set them
arm.
the bushy edge of the road where he was to stand, arranged his reins,
man’s consciousness of freedom is to be reconciled with the law of
borne by the waves from one shore to another as before. They now seemed
was trying to find some relief after what had been done, but was not
it is a trial sent from above. What is the trial for, when he is not
“One must be indulgent to little weaknesses; who is free from them,


undertaking a single serious battle, they fled still more rapidly back
with his horse, a being consequently possessed of twofold strength.
looked like a man ashamed of what he was hearing, though with no

on Sundays.
it seemed to him that he was being fired at. “What? What? What?... Cut
“Not at all bad!” he thought, examining her, “not at all bad, that


Sónya kept house, attended on her aunt, read to her, put up with her
words, and so it was.
will be stationed along the highroads on Tuesdays and Saturdays at such
master, would touch and delude him.
“Well, you’d better not play,” Dólokhov added, and springing a
“Eh, what twaddle!” said one of them, a thin, stern-looking man. “When
“Lads!” shouted Milorádovich in a loud, self-confident, and cheery
the aide-de-camp, having returned and choosing an opportune moment,
fell from him. He was glad, and at the same instant began to pity the

“In token of obedience, I ask you to undress.”
and amusingly. “And why not marry her if she really has so much money?
The larger bell was muffled and the little bells on the harness stuffed

intermittent whistle of a shell, flew over people’s heads incessantly,
pay visits, and then only to the most important persons in the town.
whether he was still firm in his intention and determined to submit to
“You have saved my life! You are French. You ask his pardon? I grant it

days without eating. We’ve nothing, we’ve been ruined.”
wrinkled up his face he was evidently preparing to smooth it out again
Hélène had been at Erfurt during the famous meeting of the Emperors
evidently in the village itself and behind the hill. To the left from
everything.
    CHAPTER I
“You won’t ask,” Natásha’s little brother was saying; “I know
whom he was again talking with the same involuntary smile. Sónya wore
a hoarse voice to the men to look to their pistols. He rode up to

drawing room, approaching now a silent, now a too-noisy group, and by a


But he had not time to realize that the colonel had been killed, that
pressing the hands of Prince Andrew and Borís. “You know I should

“The Emperor,” Pierre repeated, and his face suddenly became sad and

writing, so that his quill spluttered and squeaked. “If you have
who were carrying the body of Pétya Rostóv to a hole that had been dug
Pierre took them off, and his eyes, besides the strange look eyes have
she begged Natásha to believe that she could not help loving her as
one would have to... the Metropolitan himself... and even then it

“You should take some rest, your Serene Highness,” replied Schneider.
aimed in ordinary life. Often after collecting alms, and reckoning up
angry,” he replied.
disheveled head from the hot pillow.

seemed to have changed roles since the campaign of 1805. The old man,

successfully cannonading the French, our artillerymen only noticed this

don’t go. I will order supper. Go downstairs, we will come immediately.”
Kutúzov’s headquarters and the staffs of the commanders of columns.
expecting a crisis.”
“You are very fiery, Belliard,” said Napoleon, when he again came up to
convoy officer, who said rapidly: “We must halt here: the Emperor
obtain this he started for the country next day.
the strength of the French, does not make a single attempt to attack for

“It is said that the Emperor was reluctant to give Kutúzov those powers.
anyone, but in whose soul there were never any unkind thoughts, had to


Italian: “‘Dio mi l’ha dato. Guai a chi la tocchi!’’

sobbing like a child. The door opened. The doctor with his shirt sleeves
life, and that of the seven virtues he lacked two—morality and the
percolating through sand—spread irresistibly through the city in all
“No, Sónya, but do you remember so that you remember him perfectly,
commiserating tone.

heavy convoys (whose movements were concealed from the French) advance
very likely be getting a letter from him that day. Each time that these
the Preobrazhénsk regiment—white chamois-leather breeches and high
words spoken by important personages. At the moment the Emperors went

calling is the most highly honored.
“What a charming creature your younger girl is,” said the visitor;

and while Kutúzov was turning managed to make a grimace and then assume
when the justification is no longer needed, and displaying to the whole

detail! No, my dear fellow, no conditions better than our present ones
The husband smiled gloomily, the wife gaily. The governor’s good-natured
troops to cross it? Napoleon gave orders that the troops should form up
“Dear, dear! Just look at her!” exclaimed the countess as she
an inn in the village which the officers frequented. Rostóv rode up to
there are things in it difficult for the feeble human mind to grasp, it

“They tell me this is the room the Emperor Alexander occupied? Strange,

Bonaparte’s adjutant rode full gallop with this menacing letter to

down, lightly touched his daughter’s hair and sat down again.
Without taking leave of his new friend, Pierre left the gate with

foot through the town.

Pierre rose to help him.
slip and spoke French should pay fines to the Committee of Voluntary
seven he needed was lying uppermost, the first card in the pack. He had

Ignát left off smiling, adjusted his belt, and went out of the room with
imagination he was that terrible moaning personified. When she saw an
build Prince Andrew could endure physical fatigue far better than many


He felt that he no longer looked presentable, and feared that if he were
How did it begin? I traveled from Moscow with Prince Vasíli. Then there
behind the pineapples at her husband whose face and bald head seemed
For the ancients these questions were solved by a belief in the direct
he said:
would happen to her before he came. She could no longer think of him by
affairs of his regiment and was considerate and kind to his men and
longer to hinder them but because the guns were trained and there was
with his small hand.

with her hands she burst into sobs.
thirteen others was led to the Virgin’s Field. It was a fine day, sunny
mined and doubly mined and that there are menacing fortifications at its


childish state of love for all men, and consequently of confidence that
companion, Dólokhov had come straight to his house, and Pierre had put

uniforms, mounted on black horses, trotting straight toward him and
been able to retain the old prince’s favor for twenty years had long
subordinate by me.

as though he was really saying that all desire for positive happiness is

Pierre, whose preoccupied, absent-minded, and massive figure was a very
fulfill the demands of politeness, and she firmly resolved to maintain
It was already quite dark when Prince Andrew rattled over the paved

If men descended from the apes at an unknown period of time, that is
before he had not understood how the idea of leaving the quiet country

The older men, who thought it undignified to amuse themselves with such


Countess Mary. She knew how Nicholas disliked being waked. Then through
“But, my dear....”
the one-ruble borzois. That’s it, come on!” said he, panting and
is Spain, where there are also many churches and monasteries.”
hunts, theatricals, dinners, and music. He was glad to see Prince
time but talked in low tones of other matters.
himself up, he can hardly walk! Good lord, they’ve even grabbed those
and so on. Similarly a man who committed a murder twenty years ago and
shining eyes. With a movement full of dignity and grace she half rose
and again burst into sobs. “I shall die, waiting a year: it’s

Pétya, rapidly turning his head, looked now at the drummer boy, now
times unexpectedly interrupted. Once he stopped it by shouting: “The
The count considered.
Moscow as blood flows to the heart.
mind taking a parcel for someone?—he replied: “Yes, perhaps,” or, “I

intention. She did not know what to say and turned away as if she had
Rostóv, smoking his pipe and turning his head about as the water
Pelagéya, turning to Princess Mary for support.
pressing against one another to see him.
into details concerning the estate management, asking for instructions.
can’t get them from anyone else. He’s not there himself, so you’ll

Another, the red, stout Nesvítski, lay on a bed with his arms under his
with its singers, surrounded Pierre’s carriage and blocked the road.
and at the same instant plumped into something. Some militiamen who were


the ballroom looking after the packing of the glass and china. Natásha
Such as she are rare here,” he thought, as Natásha, readjusting a
my sin, my brother would have had to go as a soldier. But he, my younger
for themselves.

evident he had reflected on this subject more than once, and he spoke
me!” prayed Natásha, with impatient emotion in her heart, not crossing

another. “The day before yesterday it was ‘Napoléon, France,
The worse everything became, especially his own affairs, the better
scarcely move, trotted with much effort to the column presented
something had to be decided, and these conversations around him which
When it is impossible to stretch the very elastic threads of historical

the conspiracy is crowned with success.
“My brother dined with me yesterday—we nearly died of laughter—he
from you any longer. You know, we love one another! Sónya, darling, he

“If it does not weigh a hundredweight and won’t break my neck...
doctor. He was received in the best houses not merely as a doctor, but
he did not see him and had no opportunity of seeing him, he often spoke
set without whom my wife cannot exist, and those women.... If you only
thrashing the laboring sides of his chestnut horse with his whip as if
At that moment Anna Pávlovna came up and, looking severely at Pierre,
overtake his regiment.


surveying the guests, and leisurely arranged her wide sleeves as if
raised elbows was lifting the infant over the rail of his cot.
“Consider my position, Peter Nikoláevich. Were I in the cavalry I
into French which suited it better.
As Pierre was entering the reception room a courier from the army came
together into one mass, and so went on to the end. Berthier wrote to his
body, but no shirt. He was evidently afraid the prisoners looking on
But strange to say, all these measures, efforts, and plans—which were
pregnant,” said Prince Andrew, following every movement of his
He turned his head and saw that the adjutant was putting another
    CHAPTER XXIII


be heard. On the Arbát Square the troyka caught against a carriage;

“Why should we agree? We don’t want the grain.”
stopped a second time by “Uncle’s” borzois.


“Thank God!” he exclaimed. “Yes, thank God!” he repeated, listening to


editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless
evidently very angry, was saying.
obtuseness to everything other than himself disarmed Pierre.
grateful look, but was still expectant and looking for someone. The old
The aide-de-camp was sent to confirm the order which had not been


another, according to whether the animal is or is not leading them in


partner) “are blue, her mouth coral and ivory; her figure” (he glanced

and of Princess Mary’s.
turned out splendidly all the same,” he added, winking at Véra.
and happy confusion glanced occasionally at her, and tried to think what
one day’s ration of bread remains, and in some regiments none at all,
the city but of the camp, walking in the middle of the streets. Both
said: “That’s bad! Go on, go on.”

Natásha looked at Sónya with astonishment. Evidently this question
in regard to which the majority of members were stingy and irregular.
“Try to serve well and show yourself worthy,” added he, addressing

“You were at the battle, we heard.”
increased, we never reach a conception of complete freedom, that is,

morning went away, avoiding Borís. In his civilian clothes and a
often passed through his mind and left no trace behind.

floated across the sky and occasionally veiled the sun, but toward
the room, and without greeting anyone went up to Denísov and began
is the more free the more abstract its interests, and his elemental hive
the proprieties—a deputation.
clearly what chiefly concerned her about her father’s illness. On waking
wished to have word with their mistress.
Neapolitans. The Imperial army, strictly speaking, was one third
first’; that’s what the old folks used to tell us,” he added rapidly.
Prince Andrew looked up his former acquaintances, particularly those he
of her most august Majesty the Empress Márya Fëdorovna. Pierre felt
“I’ll sing for you a whole evening,” said Natásha.
the icon he began to say his evening prayers.
kindle fires and make a noise to deceive us.”
dropping his head he sat down on the cold ground by the wheel of the
sixty-three hands. He asked one, ‘From whom did you get it?’ ‘From
wisest men, boldly yet prudently overcome superstitions, infidelity, and
another—and so they ought all to be happy.
CHAPTER I
so she could not guess his words.
Natásha smiled rapturously.

debts the existence of which no one had suspected. The debts amounted to
the most part harmful (the harm was scarcely perceptible, as they
inevitable pain showed itself.
just starting myself. Inform them...”



soul. It was explained to her that this was la grâce.

she was with them. Natásha grew pale, in a panic of expectation, when

commence on the right wing.
when with a foreboding of disaster she had remained at home against his
Circassian was Sónya, and that Sónya was certainly his future happy
eldest princess at the door asking whether she might come in.
position. From her feminine point of view she could see only one
The children were playing at “going to Moscow” in a carriage made of
“No, I won’t,” said Pierre, pushing Anatole aside, and he went up

clean shirt on the feather bed with its warmed and fragrant pillows, he

“Do you know,” he said at last, evidently unable to check the sad
Denísov joined Nesvítski.
like a man plunged into water he lost consciousness. When he came to
with their lower branches lopped off, a field on which shocks of
French—through the very gate by which he had left it four days
and criticize his camp in his absence. From this short interview with
between a despairing wail and a tender murmur, so that the wail fell
and his party had been on the move. All day long he had been watching
choked him, and leaning his elbows on the window sill he began to cry,
Mounting his horse again Prince Andrew lingered with the battery,

gazing at the floor in front of Dron.

to hand the letter direct to him and tell him all... could they really
them.
But when they had convinced themselves that this man in the white hat
“But a large number of monasteries and churches is always a sign of the
high-backed chairs at a large table under the portrait of the Emperor,
without wars. How is it that we women don’t want anything of the kind,
might be recognized.
sat with two colonels and other Frenchmen with scarves on their arms.

jacket.
The generals seemed to listen reluctantly to the difficult dispositions.
Mary, who had been won by his gentleness with the pilgrims, gave him her
the Semënovsk regiment, then about Arakchéev, and then about the Bible
Nicholas sighed, bit his mustache, and laid out the cards for a
above his head: “Captain Túshin! Captain!”
into their conversation either a shade of pretense and falsehood or
    CHAPTER III

or more passed by. The old man was living as a convict, submitting as

“My dear fellow, how are you?” said he through the singing, making
Little as Nicholas had occupied himself with Sónya of late, something
     How sweet, as fancies wander free,
enough to be tied to a bad woman. But still he pitied Prince Andrew to
notion of the outcome of any of his actions.
moment, sat beside him: the rest, crowding round him, watched every

wanted.

cannot leave the estate to Pierre. Pierre is illegitimate.”
On these three considerations alone is based the conception of
hill opposite, with the French moving about on it, opened out before
Some thirty years ago Ferapóntov, by Alpátych’s advice, had bought a
your business! It won’t be you, but I, who’ll suffer. Leave me
the joke as an insult, flared up, and said such unpleasant things to the


It was a system—a concurrence of circumstances.
“Síla Andréevich” and the words, “Uncle will give it to us
of beginning anew pictured to himself the blissful, irreproachable,
were too one-sidedly personal and brain-spun. And there was the former
to Napoleon in 1806? Was the will of the Russian people transferred
and a half feet, and this did duty for bedsteads and couches. The roof
Pétya, clinging to his legs, kept shouting, “And me too!”
fourteenth of June they defeated the Spaniards. My brother Masons swear
And the countess bent over her reticule to hide her agitated face. Sónya
become as I used to know him when a child: kind, affectionate, with that

army.... You are in a position to seize its baggage and artillery.
walk. That morning she had returned to her favorite mood—love of,
tête-de-pont. * They spin him a thousand gasconades, saying that
“something absurd will come of it.”... Prince Andrew did not catch
at Yaroslávl, and Denísov who told him this news also mentioned Hélène’s
highest spheres.

of human appellations he could not renounce it, said the officer’s look
“One might easily get killed that way! What do they mean by it? Killing
everyone he could stop, but got no answer from anyone.

of humanity went on as unceasingly as the flow of time. Various groups

French since Suvórov met them. He feared that Bonaparte’s genius
asked to give up all he possessed.



than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official


away? But where to? It’s one—let them sing!”
“Three days?” said Natásha. “It seems to me I’ve loved him a
“Sit down,” said he. “Prince Bolkónski?”


depends on your decision. Never mind me!”
Natásha never remembered how she entered the drawing room. When she
happy he became. That dreadful question, “What for?” which had formerly
up to the altar, placed his feet at right angles, and bade him lie down,

the connection between those men and the nations has not been found.
He did not like talking about his life as a soldier, though he did not
come up to him.

possibility of being what they were. And they with their simple, kind,

go?”
wishes to test me!” His heart contracted and the blood rushed to his
married.
Again Princess Mary tried to catch someone’s eye, but not a single eye

French Guards in their bearskin caps on the left.
Apart from these two concepts which in their union mutually define one
That evening Nicholas did not go out, but stayed at home to settle some
“Do you remember me?” asked Borís quietly with a pleasant smile.


brought salvation might have proved disastrous.


topic—making fun of the military men of the day, and more particularly
assumption that everybody’s welfare depended on this or that issue
forces ready to manifest themselves just as strangely, unexpectedly, and
and to suppress robbery.
fidelity to a man who on his part, by entering the married state without
that went before?” She recalled her love for Prince Andrew in all its
desecrate our holy shrines. How long, O Lord, how long shall the wicked

Who these men were nobody knew. “Clear that away!” was all that was said
to all those rules. She felt that the allurements instinct had formerly

When they had crossed the Crimean bridge the prisoners moved a few steps
stake of twenty rubles.
Prince Andrew rose, shrugged his shoulders, and walked about the room.

improve, but on the other hand felt anxious as to the effect this
Mummy! such a thing never happened to me before,” she said, surprised

and more subject to necessity than those of a man living in solitude and
not stop at any one of these positions because Kutúzov did not wish to

Márya Dmítrievna, having found Sónya weeping in the corridor, made her

He also acted badly by concerning himself with the active army and
she could not see what she ought to sacrifice, or for whom. She could
the road to the place to which he had been sent, he had galloped to the
voice were at once heard from there.
that Pétya thought the French would immediately detect their disguise,
his trap. The innkeeper stood at the gate.

But even if we assume that fifty years ago Alexander I was mistaken in
killed anyone, or insulted or wished harm to anyone? Why such a terrible
“Now, why need you do it?” said Princess Mary. “Why did you come
followed singly. The footmen began moving about, chairs scraped, the
“If you please, your excellency, Pétrusha has brought some papers,”
    CHAPTER X
father’s ridicule of the new men, and drew him on and listened to him
Natásha gave herself up so fully and frankly to this new feeling that
In the midst of a conversation on political matters Anna Pávlovna burst
death’s door. But you were enjoying yourself. Yes, enjoying...”
outside—gradually began to disperse as soon as Denísov began reading
locality was known and shown in every detail on the maps, and Bonaparte,
she cried suddenly to her own surprise and with tears in her voice.

“Sónya, what is this?” she cried, twanging a thick string.

the whole throng hurried to the entrance.
arrival of young Prince Andrew and his wife was daily expected, but
the depth of their national feeling, then the role chosen by Rostopchín

some sort were moving about, in front and behind moved lines of troops;
Fabvier, not entering the tent, remained at the entrance talking to some
near him pricked their ears at these shouts. Over there, where the
and looked at him closely.

eight, returning after a sleepless night, he sent for embers, changed
away....”
countess have done had she not been able sometimes to scold the invalid
“There now!... So you, too, are in the great world?” said he to
All that day the hounds remained at home. It was frosty and the air was
this or that? Why did he not take up a position before reaching Filí?
that she and I may be man and wife,” he told himself.
“Liberty and equality,” said the vicomte contemptuously, as if at


were there, only disorganized crowds of troops of various kinds. He
reception.
father, he feels for you.”
and said in a loud voice, evidently wishing to be heard by all:
easily and simply receive an immediate and certain solution.
backwardness of a people,” said Napoleon, turning to Caulaincourt for

guided the event.
“With my father and sister, remember,” said Prince Andrew gently.
“Madame de Genlis! Madame de Genlis!” shouted laughing voices
Murat’s face beamed with stupid satisfaction as he listened to “Monsieur
government, and to Napoleon III. When explaining these rapid transfers
and she therefore asked Pierre to tell his brother-in-law in her name to
“Forgive what?” he asked.
“Where has he gone? Where is he now?...”
marriage but the pleasure married people get from one another, that is,
“God is merciful....”
previous and of the impending battle. Some Cossacks on the prowl for
who at the front had the power to annihilate him, a lieutenant of the
the state of the Prussian army. As soon as he had finished she turned to


hurriedly along the path they had trodden down, to the dressing station.
conform to them and follow them, and let us be persuaded that the less
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full
music. The host followed with Márya Antónovna Narýshkina; then
general attention, and Anna Pávlovna felt that the novelty she had
and the whole secret lies in the terrible truth that she is a depraved
everybody! Not forgetting anyone. I always said when he was only so
have virtuous aims,” said Pierre, feeling ashamed of the inadequacy

recommended to the Empress) and at the same time to console him, so she
CHAPTER XVII

his Russian being—what every Russian soldier felt: that the French were
to be opened. Everywhere he saw the stewards’ accounts, according to
criticisms of the present. For them all, that old-fashioned house with
so do you too! To the health of Alexander the First! Hurrah!”

the adjutant on duty,” said the official. “He will conduct you to
more confused, blushed like a child till tears came to his eyes, began

away. “Go away, all of you; it’s not true! Killed!... ha, ha, ha!...

parole, je n’ai pas voulu l’offenser. * I did not mean anything,
to his people in Germany; and he felt greatly offended when the butler
acts and way of life—were glad of Pierre’s return because they knew that
suburb. “Moscow deserted!” he said to himself. “What an incredible
    CHAPTER XII
danced Daniel Cooper with his daughter.

“I had the pleasure,” replied Prince Andrew, “not only of taking part in

The princess too had prepared provisions for Pierre’s journey.

the climate,” said he.
it was rumored that freedom had been granted them but the landowners had


Several soldiers fell.
as in their simplicity some historians think who say that the leading
“If there were treason, or proofs of secret relations with Napoleon,
nehmen.” *
aim it is necessary that you should add your efforts and should, if
or love. Now reason suggested quite the opposite. After that journey
exist.... Why? It cannot be that there is no answer. And I believe there
to a tune in which the weary musicians blundered, and while tired
seemed to say: “Yes, there’s nothing left for you and me but to sip
Pierre sat down by the fire and began eating the mash, as they called
took leave of her.
coin in his palm. “She will soon be singing and frolicking about. The
when he ran to save the child. She had now become quiet and, clinging
the deserted field. “No, it can’t be!” thought Rostóv, taking a
fought out in physical philosophy. Theology stood on guard for the
philosophic—we find a general law of necessity to which he (like all
some understanding. He replied: ‘From no one; I made it up myself.’
Rome, the son and heir of their adored monarch.


obligations.”
“And me? Would you like to kiss me?” she whispered almost inaudibly,
ago this suddenly happened.” She understood those words to mean that he
Mouton who, speaking last, said what they all felt: that the one thing
The officer who had been sent to inquire met Denísov on the way with the
they should leave her alone.

“Do you know, Mary...” Natásha suddenly said with a mischievous smile
or mother, or self-sacrifice with the possibility of a reward, is more
All are struck by the justness of his views, but no one undertakes to
the blood that rushed to his heart at the thought. “I will fall at
In the room next their bedroom there was a confusion of sabers,

God. Formerly he had sought Him in aims he set himself. That search for

unrestrained irritability to which spoiled people are so prone.
countess, who sat holding in one hand the snuffbox with its portrait and
hundred rubles was left of that money, so that this seven of hearts
almost time,” she added, giving Pierre to understand that they were

about him. He reddened and turned away.
nonsense....”
in accord with his intentions. Prince Andrew noticed, however, that
except veneration could such a man as my father evoke? And I am so
less than four miles from Moscow, no such question existed. When had
“Soyez tranquille, Lise, you will always be prettier than anyone
under the icons, sat Barclay de Tolly, his high forehead merging into
of the chamber who have not considered themselves offended by the new
comprehensible than gratuitous self-sacrifice, and therefore seems less
CHAPTER IX
The fourth order was: The vice-King will occupy the village (Borodinó)
The princess gave a wrong answer.
But while Nicholas was considering these questions and still could reach
Talk in general centered round three melancholy facts: the Emperor’s
bridge. Sometimes through the monotonous waves of men, like a fleck of
    * “Child of the Don.”
what do we, I mean the Austrian court, care for your victories? Bring
Balashëv’s uniform and sword.
went about among the mummers without removing her spectacles, peering
Just as the mother and son, having reached the middle of the hall, were
Prince Bagratión and Túshin looked with equal intentness at
before he could reach Znaim. Hence Bagratión with his four thousand
what happened—the insane, convulsive stampede of Napoleon’s army during
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
units. The first method of history is to take an arbitrarily selected
from the French, and when his eyes met those of the prisoners they
have attracted our attention, and to study the movements of the herd
guests were all conversing with one another. “The Razumóvskis... It
“A trifle,” said the colonel in his bass voice: “two hussars

activity controls people’s actions, for that view is not confirmed by


The fifth party consisted of those who were adherents of Barclay de
then brought back to the general circle.
to the devil, I’m busy!” he shouted to Lavrúshka, who went up to
The staff officer remained behind and Prince Andrew rode on alone.
“Those are Mary’s ‘God’s folk,’” said Prince Andrew. “They
“Here’s something for you to report,” said Zherkóv. “See if I
Despite this destitution, the soldiers and officers went on living just
it would be injudicious to use them at a moment when a last attempt at

where his regiment was stationed, and take him to visit Prince Nicholas
Kutáysov is! How sorry I am!”
ashamed of in what Prince Andrew had overheard.
from present affairs, but then he suddenly started and his face assumed
Arakchéev’s eyes turned toward him.
and severity.
of the feebleness of age, “Bolkónski!” he whispered, pointing to
regular tread and halted eight paces from the post. Pierre turned away

Tíkhon, but asked several times whether his son had gone. Next day,
particular attention. As happens to some people, especially to men



and evidently unconscious of what she was doing began shouting in angry
followed by their suites. Kutúzov, affecting the manners of an old
sitting up in bed and speaking softly.



But the adjutant turned his horse about and rode on.

preoccupied manner. He beckoned to one of his white adjutants and asked
Prince Andrew’s regiment, had joined him in Moscow and was being
histories of the culture of that period.
“Now then, what do you want?” asked Napoleon in the tone of a man
wolf.
With regard to military matters, Napoleon immediately on his entry into
stirred within him.
to know what is right and what is wrong. Men always did and always will
talk to her. What a darling Sónya is!” he added with a smile.


“They even tell me wonders I myself never dreamed of! Mary Abrámovna
back, Cadet!” he cried angrily; and turning to Denísov, who, showing
overtake him so quickly.
in only his stockings, rose when they entered, smiling not altogether
there in time?” replied Balagá. “Didn’t we get you to Tver in
immediately. I won’t say another word to him,” thought Pierre. He
It was not the dress, but the face and whole figure of Princess Mary
last deciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words
place and took mistaken decisions; here was no Sónya with whom he
    CHAPTER V
and was leading him from the room.
she listened to what was going on behind the door and, hearing him
“Count...” said Telyánin drawing nearer to him.
“All is over,” he thought, and a cold sweat broke out on his
about so!...”
harmful in an army; that a sovereign should reign but not command the

and clearer than violin or horn—played its own part, and before it had

court privilege.”

“Now he is censured and accused by all who were enthusiastic about him


him for signature a paper relating to the recovery of payment from army
orchestra, everyone ran off, again dragging one of their number away,
CHAPTER XII

people has by tacit agreement prescribed to them. But what this program
heard he is getting married? And also from my husband’s friend

is now rushing along the road to Brünn and will be here in a day or
and even now never says a word against him. Those pranks in Petersburg
and the cavalry dashed without orders in pursuit of the flying Russians.
said Dólokhov.
as it were family feeling of animation.
unite he was displeased that Smolénsk was abandoned and burned without a
“No, she has dressed and gone into the drawing room,” said Sónya.

it is a society of true conservatives—a society of gentlemen in the full
The princess said nothing, but suddenly her short downy lip quivered.
benefactor was heard speaking all the time and the sound of his words

went to the middle of the ballroom to sing, but with quite a different
Ivánovna the buffoon sat with a sad face at the window with two old
the colonel, closely—to find in his face confirmation of his own
snuffbox to his nose. “You are fond of travel, and in three days you
you ask me,” continued Prince Andrew, becoming irritable—as he was
sighed and pressed on the bench with both hands to raise himself.
late at night, except when he eats his very plain food, he is working
she had been a sick child. The last weeks passed in her mother’s bedroom
“Yes, Moscow will be surrendered! She will be our expiation!” shouted

if complaining of Kutúzov.

might have lost half his army but could not have taken Smolénsk. Our
Frenchman remembers his bayonet and stabs him....”
the count’s first words he raised it slowly and looked up at him as if

even little Nicholas exchanged looks in silence. The old prince returned
“She’s much thinner, but all the same she’s pretty!”
long coat, who from his manner of walking and moving was evidently

young man’s recent loss by the death of Count Bezúkhov (everyone
“No, it cannot be! How happy I am! But it can’t be.... How happy I am!
“I’ll drink it! Let’s have a bottle of rum!” shouted Pierre,
foul-mouthed devils, you brutes, I’ll give it to you!” shouted he,


force of free will, incomprehensible in itself but of which everyone is
“Well, good-by, my dear fellow; remember that with all my heart I share
The adjutant, having obeyed this instruction, approached Prince Andrew.








opposite. Pierre spoke little but examined the new faces, and ate a
splendid soldiers. Besides he began by attacking Germans. And only
The countess, who heard at once from the maids what had happened at the
about? Eh? The peasants are rioting, and you can’t manage them? You’re
The despairing, dejected expression of Natásha’s face caught his eye.
as if flinging something to the ground, the drummer—a lean, handsome


the door and as soon as it opened his rough old arms closed like a vise
reinforcements.
clearly, her pulse beat a hundred to the minute, and the blood throbbed

Natásha, afraid that her brother would do something dreadful, had
amazed Pierre.
the telescope through which he had till now gazed over men’s heads, and

listened to orders. Fifteen hundred prisoners and thirty-eight guns were
After hearing him, Kutúzov said in French:
“Charming!” said he, kissing the tips of his fingers.
before him with the force of reality and drew nearer. Prince Andrew
attaining to the art of integrating them (that is, finding the sum of

priest, gave the soldier a cross to kiss before his execution.” So


Denísov’s eyes.



estates. His new brethren gave him letters to the Kiev and Odessa Masons

Last Updated: January 21, 2019
Napoleon meant. He could not understand it. For the representative of
The doctor came every day, felt her pulse, looked at her tongue, and
Your Majesty, in the goodness of your heart, should allow yourself to be
Vílna—independently of the greater or lesser intensity of the cold, the
his jaw quivering. “He’s been dead since morning. After all we’re
and, scowling, he gave Nicholas just such a look as he had given Pierre
“Why are they leaving the town?” asked Alpátych.
been put off,” said the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, by force
with it hidden for awhile; then looking up and seeing Pierre she
it were breathing heavily and jolting. This happened to him almost every
shook her head disapprovingly and angrily at every solemn expression
blushing.
Pierre too bent his head and let his hands fall. Without further thought


“Get onto the ice, over the ice! Go on! Turn! Don’t you hear? Go
cautiously took one step and then another, and found herself in the
carts with wounded stopped by the side of the road close to Pierre. The
Pierre exchanged glances with Countess Mary and Nicholas (Natásha he
globe—to show, in contrast to that grandeur, the simplest paternal
and tried to discover what he thought about marriage.


ask about him. Then suddenly Sónya told me he was traveling with us. I
     * To understand all is to forgive all.
trembled, “but God had already forgiven him—he was dead! That’s how it
him he is a fool, that’s all!”
Ekonómov.

you my word of honor,” said Napoleon, forgetting that his word of honor
consultations were detached from real affairs and did not link up with
even the manifesto itself should no better pretext present itself.
“Let’s go. Let’s go!” cried Anatole.
In giving and accepting battle at Borodinó, Kutúzov acted involuntarily
curtain aside and for some time his frightened, restless eyes could not
his bald crown. He had a St. George’s Cross round his neck and looked

“I will tell my sister to ask her to dinner,” said Anatole.
know my principles—everything aboveboard! I will ask her tomorrow in

in love with the Tsar,” he said.
on the soft springs of the carriage, he turned to Prince Andrew.
his beautiful daughter Hélène.
question of what causes historic events another answer presents itself,

CHAPTER XXV
prejudices, and equality of citizenship, and all these ideas Napoleon
Moscow without a battle,” though Moscow was then already abandoned. When
“I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess that my
still the hunting establishment which Nicholas had even enlarged, the
the battery. (This was the attack for which Ermólov claimed the credit,
and not with his eyes.
handkerchief, and listened to what the housekeeper was saying.
“I am expecting you, Pierre,” said the same voice, but gently and
the verge of a quarrel.
“You know N— N— received a snuffbox with the portrait last
the people who know of it the less a woman in travail suffers, everyone




Kutúzov’s activity was directed toward restraining his troops, by
ready so soon?”

The count stood by the window and listened without turning round.
up to Denísov’s squadron and rode at a footpace not far from Rostóv,
“No, Princess, I have lost your affection forever!” said
overcoat, stood in the middle of the sleigh, reins in hand.
and by a servant who passed out on tiptoe without heeding them. They
trilled, and their voices reverberated now near, now far away.
In 1808 the Emperor Alexander went to Erfurt for a fresh interview with
had not been precisely executed. He kept laughing sarcastically, he
of the princess who—she thought—was making a favor of receiving her,
Sónya’s letter written from Tróitsa, which had come as an answer to
so for friendship’s sake he is leaving the university and me, his

CHAPTER XIII
standing at the front door. From the landing where Pierre stood there
by Russian and French troops. Because it was summer, when it is so
bald head he looked good-naturedly at the officer and the orderly and

Nicholas sat leaning slightly forward in an armchair, bending closely
from the one army and back to Valúevo from the other. Other crowds,
hear and understand my benefactor’s words.” Again he covered himself up
yet. He felt that he must not say it.
preparations made for the dinner; he saw the Russian and French colors
plump, clean-shaven, blackish cheeks and every moment expected the
to then been in regular order and silent began to sway and stretch and
entered the drawing room elegantly dressed in the uniform of an
again. At last four men in uniforms and sashes emerged from the
“And, if your excellency will allow me to express my opinion,” he
More than two hours passed and Gerásim took the liberty of making a

embarrassing. So he was silent. But before he had decided what to do,
“It’s the business of us soldiers. But in a gentleman it’s wonderful!
back to the fire, and immediately fell asleep. He again slept as he had
went. The Emperor was following him, and Bennigsen had hastened on
“You know her husband, of course?” said Anna Pávlovna, closing her
“As far as the service goes he is quite punctilious, your excellency;
better not think of it—not till he comes back!” she told herself,
Seeing that smile, Rostóv involuntarily smiled himself and felt a still
the whole matter and decide what was right and how he should act, but
hat in hand and with a smile on his face was the last of the guests to
“Yes,” said Rostóv as if it cost him a great deal to utter the
colonel was called Bogdánich) “shuts you up.”
sign papers, to present himself at government offices, the purpose of
“This is what they have done with Russia! This is what they have done
The young man in his clattering chains stepped clumsily to the spot

holding it a little longer in his own.
him, returned to his place and sat down. In his hands he had something
quietly without alarming them and then, after joining Dólokhov who was

hairs painfully in the knot. Then he drew his face down, kissed him, and

and put the matter before the Emperor,” said Princess Anna
“And who are you?” cried the officer, turning on him with tipsy
The undecided question as to whether the wound inflicted at Borodinó was
It can’t be helped!” said the count, shrugging his shoulders and
He leaned his elbows on the table with his pen in his hand and,
None of them, not even the middle-aged Dimmler, wanted to break off
property, when one person advised one thing and another something else.
Rostóv still had the same indefinite feeling, as of shame.
Pétya,” she thought.
“I? Yes, yes, certainly!” cried Pétya, blushing almost to tears and
one oak!”
That feeling of alertness and of readiness for anything was still
tell him.
which all was clear, but nothing eternal or mysterious.
“Well, and how is she?” asked Pierre.
Melyukóvka, it is still stranger that we drove heaven knows where and
his frowning brow.
clever things and one doesn’t care to listen, but this one talks
without any definite position, without relations or even a country, did
infantry regiment, but learning from Lavrúshka that the transport
“Nothing,” answered Princess Mary, looking firmly with her radiant
When he had become a little quieter, he explained to Rostóv that he was

serving as a private. But the command of the extreme left flank had been
from the low ground by the pond, a puff of white smoke appeared, then

the soil. The government has taken the following steps to ensure freedom
with something. It was a coffin with bones inside. He was not at all
but why, whither, and who they were, it was impossible to make out.
flustered voices here and there were heard calling and caps began to
been dislocated by the capture of the Shevárdino Redoubt on the

dancing, but the governor’s little wife placed her plump hand on his
whispered to one another, casting significant looks at him with a kind
defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a

time to get his uniform. He had on a shabby cadet jacket, decorated with

with soothing irony replied: “What a fool I am to ask that! What did

to prevent the conversation from taking an unpleasant course, told a
fire, and overwhelm with shellfire the enemy’s battery, against which
herself but letting her slender arms hang down as if expecting some
this! The chief news, about which all Moscow gossips, is the death of




quarters torches and candles were burning and no one slept. The old
not forsake him. He will fulfill his vocation and crush the hydra of

you’ll like it,” and he patted her cheek. “It will drive all the
on! Go on!” And cries of horror were heard in the crowd. The soldiers
of slender needles or splinters, to the sound of this whispered music.
deeds, and while dying he expressed the love his actions had proved.
entered, the bronze handle of one of the doors turned and Prince Vasíli
stretch their legs and converse in couples.

same applies to historical events. Why war and revolution occur we do
and I am rich.... Yes, that’s the only reason.... Yes, were it not for

childlike way through his spectacles.
“Weren’t you asleep?”

the Rhetor but Pierre’s sponsor, Willarski, whom he recognized by his
army at Vílna. Those about him said that he became extraordinarily slack
of his love for Natásha and his firm resolve to make her his wife.
“He doesn’t play that part right!” said “Uncle” suddenly, with
“We are such friends, such friends! All that ruler business was just
his saber. Only ten paces divided them. Dólokhov lowered his head to

to stop, knew the danger of his extended position, and knew that the
relinquishing that role and abandoning Moscow without any heroic display
My father has not spoken to me of a suitor, but has only told me that he
Thirty-second Military Division, of Bremen, of Hamburg, and so on: it

Russians. Napoleon stopped his horse and again fell into the reverie
and the more he talked the less could he control his words.

nothing. After that day he lived through many things, gaining knowledge,
prisoner enhanced his own importance as a Russian hero. The Italian

“Fancy the Emperor’s position!” said they, and instead of extolling
“Oh! Oh, ooh!” he sobbed, like a woman.

to others for any weakness, passion, or temptation—the possibility of
gone into another room, to which the countess hurriedly followed him, he
Konovnítsyn had brought him.

Dólokhov stayed by the gate. Anatole followed the maid into the
bleed him and patch him up. He will drag about as a cripple, a burden to
impatience. Konovnítsyn’s firm, handsome, and kindly face was lit up by
“Natásha, your hair!...” whispered Sónya.
rate he glanced at the refractory arm, at Pierre’s terror-stricken
“How can people be dissatisfied with anything?” thought Natásha.
of the Highest Authorities it is said that Kutúzov was a cunning court

“The snow is deep. I am having the avenue swept, your honor.”
of life, escaped from reality into a world of delirium.

“It’s all this mania for opposition,” he went on. “And who for? It is
that feeling of agitation and expectation in Pierre which he had been

sake...!” said he.

reply to his look, and went still faster along the passage.
carriages—see how comfortably they’ve settled themselves!”
Moscow!”
stairs and embraced his sister.
Transmoskvá ward and the Kalúga road converge, and the prisoners jammed
fear it possesses all. If there were no suffering, man would not know
demanded.
    CHAPTER VI
with their management and embezzlement of money, some after their first
feeble voice, so high pitched and irresolute. His face grew more and
fingers twitched nervously.
commander in chief. He interrupted him, talked rapidly and indistinctly,
you yourself are left facing that abyss, and look in. And I have looked
his wife’s room. She was lying dead, in the same position he had seen
expectancy.



among them. But those who surrendered, while remaining in the same
“Then I won’t let it come to that... I shall tell!” cried Sónya,

I trouble myself about you, and you also know quite well that what I
not continue, noticing that this theme was too egotistic.
    CHAPTER XI
in the soul of every soldier and found expression in their joyous and
chairs and invited her to go with them. She sat down and played with

He pressed her hand.
by vainly awaiting the infantry columns that still did not appear, as
Everybody followed his example and they looked at one another in
historians of culture involuntarily contradict themselves, and show that
for gaiety and laughter to them. Pétya was in high spirits because
distinct in his dream) that he was talking of goodness and the
“Who told you that? Who?” cried the prince. “Suvórov!” And he
“In short, hoping to settle matters by taking up a warlike attitude,
partner’s hand firmly, threw back his head, and advanced his foot,
whatever—with a man who speaks to him, a book he reads, the work on
some words he had overheard), his adventures in Moscow, his captivity,
The famous flank movement merely consisted in this: after the advance
“Why talk of me?” she said quietly and glanced at Natásha.
already, Count? Well then, good-by! Oh, but the cushion for the
The concentrated activity which had begun at the Emperor’s
So energetically do we pursue this aim that after crossing an unfordable
Striking his horse with his long muscular legs as if it were to blame
Thus the captain touchingly recounted the story of his love for a
Prince Vasíli’s last words. Then rising, he suddenly went up to his

as a petitioner on behalf of this young man. You see...” but
Rostóv dismounted, gave his horse to the orderly, and followed Alpátych
n’a pas de sexe,” * they said of him.
The small lamp in front of the icons was the only light left in
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
told him what he had seen.
Life was cheaper because it was circumscribed: that most expensive
old courtier, and by Russians as something indefinite—a sort of puppet
cunning smile, as if flattered at being made the subject of Zherkóv’s
When it was late at night they went out together into the street. The
Kutúzov’s words were hardly understood by the troops. No one could have
If instead of imagining to ourselves commanders of genius leading the
of,” said the princess in the same petulantly playful tone in which
With a rapid but careful movement Natásha drew nearer to him on her

And he began to explain Freemasonry as he understood it to Prince

of contempt. “And believe me, if I still value my life it is

retreating straight back from the invaders, deviated from that direct
resembles an imitation of the French military code and from the Articles
their rooms.
inquiry in his tone. Pierre bent his head. “Your baptismal name, if you
not moving a muscle.
“Nothing... No...”
If we go we are almost sure to be taken prisoners, and God knows...”
enjoyed narrating all this, and did not seem to suspect that others,

“We must let him see Amelie, she’s exquisite!” said one of
mind at rest,” said he without altering his tone, beneath the

The war of 1812, besides its national significance dear to every Russian
“Yes... Yes...” Kutúzov repeated, his laughing eye narrowing more and

“The fact of the matter is,” said she significantly, and also in a

You say: I am not free. But I have lifted my hand and let it fall.
interests have vanished leaving no trace, and nothing remains of that
his instinct urged him on. Before the officer finished his sentence
what is going on around them.
gives the singles and snatches the doubles!”
it were not my duty I would not talk to you for a moment”), was


the men with a rapid movement of his chin.


friendship at all; I simply feel that the army is my vocation.”

me, it hurts. I’m old and weak and this is what you wanted. Well then,

Man lives consciously for himself, but is an unconscious instrument in
During the national war he was inactive because he was not needed. But
Speránski told Kochubéy he was sorry he had been unable to come sooner
greater zeal than his duty as a commander. Thanks to the strictness and
masses of soldiers, or green ammunition chests and ordnance. And all

Moscow after the death of Count Bezúkhov, he would call Pierre, or



son’s when speaking to him that afternoon, “believe me I suffer no

way, and far from spoiling the high tone and general impression of the

attentively around at the circle of officers, recognizing several of
refer only to the victory and not to the lunch, M. de Beausset ventured
constantly divined. Once she began questioning him about his son. Prince
before action which he had experienced as previously, all the inner

my friend never speak to me of that... of all that! Well, good-by. So
descriptive part of the letter. “And what a soul! Not a word about
her soul, and it seemed as if she could never finish. Several times she
    CHAPTER XVI
   He brings foemen to their knees,... etc.
at the spot where Anísya Fëdorovna had just stood. Something seemed to
When he opened the ballroom door Pierre saw Natásha sitting at the
wardrobe in which Pierre noticed garments such as he had never seen
braggart and his son, no doubt, is a fine specimen,” he grumbled to
them. The blacksmiths from a neighboring smithy, hearing the sounds of


But they did not cut off or overthrow anybody and the French army,

artilleryman, wiping away the blood with his coat sleeve, as if
would find himself in the position of Mack at Ulm. If Kutúzov decided

exclaimed in excellent French.
and proudly around while Bagratión spoke to his son.
correct. As soon as Bonaparte (who was at Schönbrunn, sixteen miles
Pierre, who had so often that day senselessly repeated that word
and went to the further end of his study. Having stood there a few
A sinking man who clutches at another and drowns him; or a hungry mother
A French official wearing a scarf came up to the right of the row of
retainers, shouted authoritatively that the superfluous ones should take
very evening—again presented itself to her and her agitation increased
They then crossed the hollow to Semënovsk, where the soldiers were
getting up and speaking in a muffled and guttural voice.

These visits of Natásha’s at night before the count returned from his
black hair, both curtsied in the same way, but the hostess’ eye

But at that moment Princess Mary said, “Natásha!” And with difficulty,
if to say that this was no more than she had expected.
the commander in chief, Kutúzov.

happiness did not appear impossible to her. It was at those moments that
through the wood and lay down.” (He suddenly lay down on his stomach

seen were tattered and frightened people who tried to hide when they saw
that knoll Pierre had no notion that this spot, on which small trenches
arrived.

have been changed. To historians who believe that Russia was shaped
Frenchmen as they ran past him, of the lowered and smoking gun, and of
was always busy and always felt in a state of mild and cheerful
She tried to pass Anna Mikháylovna, but the latter sprang so as to bar
“The squadwon can’t pass,” shouted Váska Denísov, showing his
door leading downstairs), “only it won’t be accepted.”
a confession. So Natásha tried to solve what was torturing her by
her sturdy little legs, and having examined the position of her father,
“How do you expect him to answer you all at once?” said Prince
He would have embraced her but, blushing, she stepped aside fearing to

pond. He longed to get into that water, however dirty it might be, and
Rostóv stopped his horse for a moment on a hillock to see what was
wounded in the right hand, taken his sword in the left, and gone
“No, I think the sale will come off in a few days,” said someone.
Natásha. But he was not as much at ease with Sónya and Dólokhov as
seized by an unreasoning panic—it occurred to him that the child was
self-confidence was of no avail in relation to the one question before
“Those brigands are everywhere,” replied an officer from behind the
of them or independently of them, the strangest and most contradictory
so ill that he may die at any moment, and Dr. Lorrain has come from

“And Lise, your wife?”

this character—though not lacking in virtue (the historians do not
what had happened, and expressed their readiness to punish the culprits,
museum and belabor them in the Russian way till all the nonsense jumps

heart in the presence of the unfathomable did not lessen but increased.
after them, and all four, looking round at the carriage, ran in dismay
of an immense fortune. The will has not yet been opened. I know you
he free. How he would propose to her and how she would become his wife.

butler, napkin on arm, was scanning the setting of the table, making
that tonight he was a person obliged to perform some sort of awful
Essen corps arrived and Prussia took our side.
and as they went along he was told allegories of the toils of his
did I come here?” he wondered.
And the conversation again turned on the war, on Bonaparte, and the

and secured their release by heavy payments. He did not know that the
I really take it? How fortunate!” he thought.

once that his day was over, that his part was played, and that the power

her childlike face.
     me for explaining to Pierre your intimacy with this young
in her mind. The countess knew this, but what it might be she did not
attractive to men and women. An Englishman is self-assured, as being a
animal. Count Ilyá Rostóv, laughing and repeating the words, “Make
of dread was in the air. It was evident that the affair so lightly begun
down laws for Austria at Schönbrunn, il faut lui faire grâce de

Rostóvs remained, but he did not go to see them.
ring, cried from the window: “Come here; part the bets!” This was
opponent at the moment of conflict.
course.” Perhaps he did not really think this when he met women—even
The attack of the Sixth Chasseurs secured the retreat of our right
fear and concealing it from the doctor, she agreed to Natásha’s wish and

But putting national vanity entirely aside one feels that such a
acquaintance. But as soon as Denísov smiled at him Pétya brightened


and so on—mistaking these for the real significance of the factor,
man with white hands who was doing something to him and, still standing
“I want to try to sing again,” she said, adding as if by way of excuse,
with his cloak, but now neither the lodge nor his benefactor was there.
up on the vast field. The whole army was extended in three lines: the

Pierre went to the battery and the adjutant rode on. They did not meet
Emperors get into boats, and saw how Napoleon—reaching the raft
“All the same, one is afraid! Oh, you clever people,” said a third
positions and maintaining a hellish fire under which the French army was
“Well, all right, all right.”

of people formed and dissolved, the coming formation and dissolution of
But the rams need only cease to suppose that all that happens to them
enthusiasms, dreams, and hopes of happiness or goodness, in Prince
In Natásha’s receptive condition of soul this prayer affected her
“That’s where I’m going. Shall we join up our packs?” asked



unconsciously, she opened and closed her hand in time to the music,

conscious. After receiving communion and unction he quietly died; and
sank into meditation.
rosy, was sitting in an easy chair with her work in her hands, talking
red-faced peasant in the forties, with thick lips, a broad knob of a
she could demand this, and she received what she demanded.

pistol at the Súkharev market that he met the Rostóvs.
power to be the one absolute and real power, and that any other force
in....”
back again, and hastens its own end. Napoleon, under pressure from his


shall receive my letter to the Emperor.”
“They march splendidly,” remarked someone in Bagratión’s suite.
sent instead of our dear Wintzingerode you would have captured the King
festive around him. Nearer and nearer to Rostóv came that sun shedding
followed by a Cossack.
reasonableness. If the old man came round it would be all the better to
tried to get as much taken away with them as possible.
was only eventually found, like a lost pin, by the skill—and apparently
Without haste or agitation he awaited what was coming. That inexorable,
the home; and secondly, from his hussar point of view, he regretted not

under discipline and under the influence of that discipline led them
freedom and a certain measure of inevitability. And always the more
Suvórov-like, in a kibítka, and is received with acclamations of joy
customary long-established relations on the matter.
“I spent the evening with her yesterday. She is going to their estate
mode of government is determined by certain geographical and economic
felt at every step of history.
“Ah, the villains! What heathens! Yes; dead, dead, so he is... And

“Why don’t you want to go? I promise to house and feed you, while here
fingers spread out before his eyes said:

ironically.
was evidently a German) patiently awaited the end of the service, which
Petersburg. Anna Mikháylovna, with her tear-worn but pleasant face,

angrier at having blushed, and looked at the princess with a bold and

as was natural to him, felt contented with the life he led in the
showed to the soldiers by pressing nails into the walls of the hut; his
scene of plunder.
railings. He looked back laughing to the Cossack who stood a few
and saw that the lamp stood on a black table on which lay an open book.
From the host’s room came the sounds of a child crying, the despairing
I am going to bed with a happy and tranquil mind. Great God, help me to

stern, and he fancied even contemptuous.
relations, was repugnant to him. The other way out—his mother’s
he did not look at them: he looked only at what was going on in front
air with joy.
burning among the French Guards, and in the distance those of the

Pierre saw that Prince Andrew was going to speak of Natásha, and his
stronger forces, but again attack when opportunity offers. This was done

obtained two decorations for Austerlitz.
At the moment when Rostóv and Ilyín were galloping along the road,
It was impossible to give battle before information had been collected,
Pierre who was under such obligations to him (“But never mind that”)
silent, and I recollected myself only when it was too late. My God, I
bed as before, but the stern expression of his quiet face made Princess
spoke to the taciturn Michael Ivánovich more often than to anyone else.
allow one to penetrate to his soul, and his delicate white hands, which
was its most becoming aspect. Before the beginning of the second act
of all. This gift will be a pledge of your purity of heart to her whom

Buxhöwden’s part and an epileptic fit on Bennigsen’s. But at the
to take up only second-grade posts in the lodge, to try, while
refuse her, angrily asking her not to interfere in what was not her

Kutúzov laughed bitterly.
young Rostóv took no further part in any business affairs, but
hurried off to his company, buttoning up his coat as he ran.
    * “Delighted to see you.”
him out of my house this morning. He was here; they admitted him in

repulsed, he had lost more than half his men. He said the attack
escaping from the pantry door and listened to herself and pondered. She

Bilíbin, “as you know, my dear prince, I never leave headquarters. I

After Nicholas had gone things in the Rostóv household were more
steps behind him holding two horses by their bridles. Each time Prince
“Makárka” (their name for Makárin) “will go through fire and

for permission to serve in the army.
Europe. The strength of the justification of the man who stands at the
in transparent garments and with a transparent body, flying up to the
childhood. Riding past the pond where there used always to be dozens
do this for my son—and I shall always regard you as a benefactor,”
MARY
the old prince.
found to be false. And that morning Colonel Michaud had ridden round the
said Natásha, pointing out Prince Andrew. “You remember, he stayed a
given that they should find in them the help and protection due to
that I do not like him.”

come to see her.
about the fields seeking it and dug it out with their sabers and ate it,
had any orders to give. Pétya and Natásha on the contrary, far from
accustomed movement, bent till he touched the ground with his hand, and
as if stirred to his heart’s core and himself regretting and laughing
Prince Nicholas grew more animated and expressed his views on the
embracing Prince Vasíli.
these documents, and he wrote to the German that, despite his heartfelt
“Of whom you imagine me to be one?” said Prince Andrew, with a quiet

“So much the better! I shall see it close,” he thought.
time!”
go away and the couple, left alone, still remained silent. They rarely

direct retreat by the Nízhni road. In proof of this there is the fact
did not take place at all as (in an effort to conceal our commanders’
people show to everyone when they are happy.

and the steps of a belated arrival were heard. “There’s Kurágin!”
papers where human affairs and lives were indicated by numbers, Pierre
reply to history’s essential question.
in a cheerful voice:
Laocoön’s head.
“My cousin has nothing to do with this and it’s not necessary to

“Hallo, mate! Never again? Gave you a twist?” the Cossacks would banter

drunken imbecile to account. The Frenchman listened in silence with the
that as he was responsible for the delay he ought to bear the whole
was saying.
him four thousand francs to send to his wife and children. Pierre

of the yard onto the uneven roadway; the other vehicles jolted in
remembered Anatole who had done her so much harm—and though he did not
As far as one can make out, not so much from this unintelligible
Princess Hélène, Prince Vasíli’s daughter, and the little Princess
“If he” (he meant the enemy) “begins popping at the bridge now,”
“We’ll try to,” replied Berg, touching a pawn and then removing
After living at the seat of the highest authority and power, after
whispering, not pausing an instant.
his address.

privileges harmful to the service; that honor, l’honneur, is either a
When Anna Mikháylovna returned from Count Bezúkhov’s the money, all
gully. She clicked her teeth (Karáy no longer had her by the throat),
followed was like the first movement of the main wheel of a large tower
Anna Mikháylovna’s was the most distinct.
She assumed her dolefully submissive manner and said to her husband:
letters sent through the embassy and all the searches made, his body had

“Ah!” said Kutúzov. “I hope this will be a lesson to you. Do your
luminous eyes gazing fixedly before her, not noticing that he had risen.
a wolf. The whippers-in no longer set on the hounds, but changed to the
imputed to him as a fault. His childishly rash, uncalled-for, and
the cause of justice against the enemy of the human race. Anna Pávlovna
his weapons clean and polished to the utmost, and every horse groomed
“The ways of God are past finding out!” she thought, feeling that the
of the import of what you were undertaking, you made a vow of conjugal
parade... I am the first to apologize, you know me!... He was very
success reached Kutúzov’s cheerless staff with the galloping advent
that stood in his way, threw himself on the sofa.
soldiers, and militiamen began running forward along the road.
fixed on.


concealed the unknown was lifted from his spiritual vision. He felt as
“There, what egotists men all are: all, all egotists! Just for a whim
Natásha and Princess Mary also wept now, but not because of their own
my wife—are the count’s only direct heirs. I know, I know how hard
something extraordinary and unexpected, and as if the very fact that it
service to place himself very advantageously. He was aide-de-camp to a
“Well, send number three company again,” the officer replied hurriedly.
is much better than ours.”
Pierre looked questioningly at Anna Mikháylovna to see what he was to

After supper Nicholas, having undressed in his study and given

done in the realm of history did not concern him at all.
used for dancing, but in which five beds now stood, and furniture of
and Julie were saying to one another. The governess kept looking round
breath, screamed joyously, ecstatically, and so piercingly that it set
the bigwigs who guided the club’s opinion reappeared, and everybody
long ago to have been made an officer, that he was braver than any of
after 1807, he continued to serve in the Pávlograd regiment, in which
as before and saw in them and in the subservience shown to him by the
“I’ve spoken to him. He hopes we should be in time to get away tomorrow,
27th November
“I may have appeared strange and queer then,” he thought, “but I was

struck one especially in Petersburg as a pleasant surprise, were such
forget. But, my dear, will you not give us a little hope of touching
Both were silent.

“What can have happened? And what can they want with me?” thought he
Your father, or brother, or your betrothed? And he’s a scoundrel, a
and have seen Fräulein Mathilde.”
Pierre listened to her attentively and seriously. Prince Andrew went out
a very fine thoroughbred gray Arab horse with a crimson gold-embroidered
are taken to the field marshal’s room, for he likes to do everything
“I am used to something sweet. Raisins, fine ones... take them all!” he
therefore cannot be defined. Those words only denote a certain stage of

in front. There were about thirty officers, with Pierre among them, and

he any money.
his medicine he sobbed and silently kissed her hand. On his last day,
so evident) that this was the only way an army of eight hundred thousand
anything of future married life. If he tried, his pictures seemed
different, and better, Pierre than he had been in Petersburg.


as she needed to work off her spleen so she had sometimes to exercise

has this advantage over other branches of knowledge in which the
refusing to let her see them off. The diplomatist preserved a mournful
finds a justification.

countess. Her son’s growth toward manhood, at each of its stages,
vivid sense of the terrible contrast between something infinitely great
had not yet shed its leaves, he stopped and beckoned mysteriously to
himself with Russia unless he were mad.”

‘General Bonaparte.’”
walked on either side of the vehicles seeing the travelers off.
spring!”
in a folding armchair, and continually cleared his throat and pulled at

their intellect and polished manners.
o’clock, but it was already five minutes to ten, and the girls were

order, too, could not possibly meet with any opposition.

    CHAPTER XXV
his time there.
was impossible for cavalry to act among the bushes and broken ground,
“Kill the Germans!” shouted one.
continued, “we owe today’s success chiefly to the action of that

waist in the water joyfully wriggling his muscular figure and snorted
courtiers who tried to arrange compromises between the other two. The
“Do you know, dear boy,” began the governor’s wife with a serious
with his glittering, black eyes at Rostóv.
life—love—was still active within her. Love awoke and so did life.
now knew. Prince Vasíli, who having obtained a new post and some
my pocket—can’t remember....”
Officer!” said Bagratión to Rostóv, “are the enemy’s skirmishers
abroad, asked her where they were going to spend the summer, and then


“Not Kutúzov, but what’s his name—well, never mind... there are
“But two days ago this suddenly happened,” said Natásha, struggling with
“What is it? What is it?” he asked, but his comrade was already
turned and saw Julie sitting beside her mother with a happy look on her
inclined to think he had been taken prisoner because Pierre’s strong
hand and said, “Come.” Pierre went with her to the bed on which the

muskets, entering the Bazaar empty-handed and silently making their way
the natural sciences: leaving aside the question of cause, they seek for
Almighty Hand, hitherto unseen, was becoming manifest in all that was

Malásha, who had long been expected for supper, climbed carefully
place by his will. And so the question whether he had or had not a


spot” (he stooped and pointed to the sloping ledge outside the window)

“It’s good, quite good, thank you,” said the Frenchman, in French, “but
affair. I am her father.”
stairs and up another, to Pierre’s rooms.
came into the ballroom where candles were hurriedly lighted. The

and there too sat the members of the family, and Pierre and Hélène,

“You know, Sokolóv, they are not all going away! They have a hospital

fond of the French, and almost every day of the stay at Tilsit, French
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing
with a sinking heart—watching the bridge and the hussars in the bright
find another as smart.”
and gave her alone a special smile in addition to her usual smile as
Russian expedition actually cost France less than fifty thousand men;
forward and, stooping over the dying man, beckoned to Lorrain from

almost at the middle of the table. Facing them sat Pierre, beside Prince
Russia, to desecrate the tombs of our fathers, to carry off our wives
carriage drove out of the house, he mounted and accompanied her eight
Prince Andrew stood right in front of Kutúzov but the expression of
vehemence. Gervais intervened with a joke, and the talk reverted to its
and am at your service to help you nurse my uncle. I imagine what you


jumped down and, his boots scrunching the snow, ran back to his sleigh.
on the edge of it and I burned with longing to caress him and lie down

on its steps.
before Nicholas heard one he knew, Voltórn, giving tongue at intervals;
more readily your object might be attained,” he said to Nicholas.
“I like that!” exclaimed Pétya. “Why shouldn’t I go?”
to cause unpleasantness and anxiety to the court circle of which Anna
ruin of Russia (as Rostopchín regarded it) would fall upon his doting

“What if the Smolénsk people have offahd to waise militia for the
life would it be for Sónya—if she’s a girl with a heart? Your mother

idea. And imagining that in this direction something important which
Though he heard and saw nothing around him he found his way by instinct
ceaseless hum of labor—that used to hang in long clusters down to the

says...”

more and more animated and evidently wishing to express his new outlook
sighed deeply, his whole chest heaving, and was silent for a while. “I

have to go in and ask the princesses; and from there go on to the

the activity of the leaders represents the activity of the people.
commander in chief. That same day Kutúzov was appointed commander
“Oh! Oh!” groaned Nesvítski as if in fierce pain, seizing the
“If only they would be quick!” thought Rostóv, feeling that at last
Weyrother’s had already been approved. As soon as Prince Andrew began
voices and laughter filled the air round the tables in the square.
Instead of an enemy, Nicholas found in Ilágin a stately and courteous
Kurágin into whose society Pierre’s wife had thrown her and with whom


men who did not wish to commit them, it was as if the mainspring of

plainly that there are not many wives with husbands such as you who
Natásha considered.
made a grimace, as if expecting something unpleasant.
not know Him, but He is here, He is in me, He is in my words, He is in
“Come, I will go with you. Try to weep, nothing gives such relief as

“You know, love, I wanted to tell you... Countess dear... an officer

knowledge of absolute truth. A Frenchman is self-assured because he
us to do?” he repeated and his eye shone with a deep, shrewd look.
he began thinking of the glad vindictive moment when he would meet
look with a smile. “‘Russia is not in Moscow, she lives in the hearts of
shortsighted delight at the misery of others, and doubts and torments
“Ah! ah!” screamed Natásha, rolling her eyes with horror.
her in five minutes before and, despite the fixed eyes and the pallor of

responsibility. These temporary aims are like the broom fixed in front
rum without taking it from my mouth, sitting outside the window on this
were written on the twentieth, and during all this time not only has

crossed the Niemen and, thanks to this, was able to show certain

Bourbons. Experience shows us that whatever event occurs it is always
call him but changed her mind. “Let him look for me,” thought she.

thawing in the sunshine, the horses galloped quickly, and on both sides
valet can go in your carriage. Ah! I was nearly forgetting,” he added.
Prince Andrew looked at the laughing Speránski with astonishment,

him to come. There were other guests and the countess talked little to
“I?” said Nicholas, trying to remember. “Well, you see, first I
then a note of hand for only sixty thousand.”
Princess Mary’s self-esteem would be wounded and his point (not to

amusing, now girlishly enchanting.
can you ask such a question?”

voices subsided, the footmen cleared away the broken glass and everybody
book had been sent him by someone unknown. One thing he continually
for the princess’ things. And don’t go to any meeting yourself, do you
Natásha was suffering from, as no disease suffered by a live man can be
took her sister-in-law’s arm and drew her into another room.
in such relations that the more directly they participate in performing
from behind.
been seized, that the peasants were rioting and robbing people on their
buildings and the shrill yells of some animals. And if this is really
city so long in appearing?” he wondered.
a great effort she did however go to call on them a few weeks after her
Rostóvs’ box—her whole bosom completely exposed—beckoned the old
he was in. It was not that Moscow had been taken or that the happy

to the Tsar or to Kutúzov, even if they were alive and unwounded?


learned to know him, and he will not deceive me any more....”
shouted and talked at the same time, so that Count Rostóv had not time
Countess Bezúkhova was present among other Russian ladies who had
premeditation Prince Vasíli took the first opportunity to gain his
of believing in the possibility of attaining perfection, and in the
there, it’s awful! Two bands and three sets of singers!”

consented to go, and in half an hour four troyka sleighs with large and
Lavrúshka was saying something about loaded wagons, biscuits, and oxen

the honor of being received, that I have not yet had time to think of
     he ought to be firing at the enemy.
Since she had begun looking after him, he had always experienced this
“Have you told them to bring the horse?” asked Telyánin, getting up
horses, past sentinels and men who saluted their colonel and stared with
Denísov lay asleep on his bed with his head under the blanket, though


was music... and suddenly I felt so depressed...”


    * Those whom (God) wishes to destroy he drives mad.
whim, and did not dare absent himself for any length of time, except on
The search for these laws has long been begun and the new methods of
omens there had been of it: Prince Andrew’s coming to Otrádnoe and
French, German, or English people, or, in its highest abstraction, the
In the offices and shops and at the post office everyone was talking
Natásha, and he was not surprised but quietly happy. Natásha, motionless
seventy-year-old magnates, uniformed and besashed almost all of whom
had left Paris and how he had liked that city. Anatole answered the
the forest, and Count Orlóv-Denísov, having seen Grékov off, returned,
On coming to a path in the forest along which he could see far to the
and the old countess’ grief fell blow after blow on the old count’s
of horse’s hoofs approaching at a trot along the line of hussars was
Moscow as that year.
twentieth time and finding some peculiarly deep meaning in each word of
and next balls, about theatricals, and who would meet whom, and when and
nightcap, came in.
Paulucci, desperately, apparently unable to restrain himself, “the man
there was an order to the contrary, but that if she stayed they would
face assumed its melancholy expression), “he was mentioned at Her

seeing the shell fly past and fall into the ranks of the supports.
reserve units were able to join up, and the fight was at an end. The

When they had come to the edge of the forest it was noticeably growing
room. All were silent.
front and in ambush long before then. “It may be a mistake,” thought
offers of assistance; he avoided all distraction and recreation, and
understood him. Why didn’t I enter the room?” she thought. “Perhaps he
the door, that dreadful something on the other side was already pressing
it would all end. He left off visiting Hélène and received reproachful
irreproachably washed, brushed, and buttoned, held his pipe in the
principals nor their seconds suffered for it. But the story of the duel,
“You think so?... Ah, I also wanted to ask you where our position is
“What? Has it begun? Is it time?” Pierre asked, waking up.
only to express his rapture fully.
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
slipping one little foot against the other, pushed off her slippers and
mind. This day the horrible appearance of the battlefield overcame

crying piteously and kissing me. One can do anything with him by
Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression.

this consciousness of mismanagement became a general conviction, but as

grew still louder and merged into a general roar that only an army
One of the old men nearest to him looked round, but his attention was
reproaches and angry words.
“I cannot help loving the light, it is not my fault. And I am very
“Oh no!” said Iogel, hastening to reassure him. “You were only
purification and reformation of oneself for its reception, and (3) The
the two peasants who kept as close to him as horseflies to a horse.
her face in her hands, Princess Mary sank into the arms of the doctor,
was going, still on all sides there was what there had been on the field
stroking his heated Donéts horse.
and had any effect on the people is another question) had been simply
princess (as she did when he was mentioned) and even when he thought of
you, who do not believe in the truth of the light and who have not



pressing the old man’s hand went with him into the castle.


Princess Mary, though he had scarcely known them, Pierre at once felt
Though the position was now altered by his decision to pay his wife’s

Austerlitz, and Tilsit, and Erfurt.
child, unattractively like her mother, began to yell and run away.
tenderness with which Natásha spoke of him, the boy, who was only just
the swift sinister whistle of a cannon ball, now with the agreeable
thing. He, the sensitive, tender Prince Andrew, how could he say that,
“Sónya, are you asleep? Mamma?” she whispered.
in perplexity several times a day, involuntarily beginning to reflect
the least sign of hesitation, shame, or secrecy, her cause would
below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg-tm



spring up with more energy and again play with her cousin as soon as

powerful nation like Russia—barbaric as she is said to be—to place

village street, swaying, pressing upon and cutting the shoulders of the
time. Only the skeleton of life remained: his house, a brilliant wife
direction have already been made.
After Kaysárov, others whom Pierre knew came up to him, and he had not
“No, I tell you.”
“Not all, for you will not be there; not all,” said Prince Hippolyte
relation of people to one another is seen in every combination of men


vent to a little abuse, and at last gave it all up and went forward,
considered good and bad, and only pretended to direct them and give
“Yes, my Sónya could not have done otherwise!” thought Nicholas.
there still remained for an instant a faraway dreamy expression remote
     do, Sire.”

who had lolled in Anna Pávlovna’s easy chairs and with half-closed
Nostitz, the Austrian general occupying the advanced posts, believed
of the peoples, assured himself that the aim of his actions had been the
angry. It made him angry just because the idea of marrying the gentle
and also, as he said, to let the lassies enjoy themselves for the last
“If you are resolved, I must begin your initiation,” said the Rhetor
She hummed a scrap from her favorite opera by Cherubini, threw herself
“You see?... What a wogue—it’s just as I thought,” said Denísov to the

received—assumed the position natural to it.

made the serfs and gentry join in one large circle: a ring, a string,

reached to his very heels, and, stumbling in it, ran out into the porch
“Yes, it is all very horrid,” interrupted Pierre, “very horrid.”
such a beauty! It pulls out and has a secret English drawer, you know!
reverence and was beyond question.
“Oh, Sónya, if you knew him as I do! He said... He asked me what I
the fate of battles had arrived. Would this disorderly crowd of soldiers
Only the expression of the will of the Deity, not dependent on time, can
hear him.

The terrible spectacle of the battlefield covered with dead and wounded,
estate. Despite the indifference to the affairs of the world he had
from Másha, the lady’s maid, the necessary report of how handsome the
by her breadth. “That black-spotted one of yours is fine—well

“Oh, quicker, quicker! To get back to that time and have done with all
shouting and lashing their horses, kept crossing from side to side. The
In moments of pride, when he thought of his position it seemed to
Pierre, on unexpectedly becoming Count Bezúkhov and a rich man, felt

been written was only one intermediate stage in its destruction, and
you understand, your excellency, my dear sir, that you must not
to notice him, and that his whole aim now was to test the cadet’s
Dólokhov—now an officer—wounded in the arm, and on foot, with

been taken out of the churches and everybody was to be ordered to leave.
approaching catastrophe. One of his brother Masons had revealed to

accepts, accustomed as he was to it, astonished him each time as if it
that’s not it—that’s tomorrow. Oh yes! Natásha... sabretache...
house, with its bare, unplastered log walls, was not overclean—it
another in such and such ways, why not explain them by the fact that

Prince Andrew always became specially keen when he had to guide a young

“And do you know, my dear fellow, it seems to me that Bonaparte has
un bâtard!”* she added, as if supposing that this translation of the
guitar and at once found the chords of the song.
streets to the other side of Moscow.
free use of his fists. At first he saw nothing reprehensible in
case of any commander in chief) to prevent an attack.
bring in any plan of his own. He will not devise or undertake
something I cannot inflict on others,” said Prince Andrew, growing

feet into his slippers and his arms into the sleeves of his dressing
another at the same time they both began to speak. Pierre began with
Moscow’s hero was the fact that he had no connections in the city
“Father Kutúzov.”
acquired though she did not understand its significance. This expression
hand. After their engagement, quite different, intimate, and natural
acquaintances would have considered rather bad form, but who was liked
have some.”


one leg.
court, but it was not much appreciated at Napoleon’s dinner, where it
Two valets rapidly dressed His Majesty, and wearing the blue uniform of
to the place where they were all to meet. The hounds had killed two of

She rose and smoothed her hair, which was as usual so extremely smooth
dignitary, when asked his opinion, replied that he thought so too.
All the way Pétya had been preparing himself to behave with Denísov as
Meanwhile Moscow was empty. There were still people in it, perhaps a
glory of thy rule, sings in exultation, ‘Hosanna, blessed is he that
to the fire, hoarsely uttering something in a language our soldiers did
slight smile he began to examine his nails.
asked Natásha, so seriously and excitedly that it was evident that what
happened had Napoleon been in time to penetrate into the rich southern
“Oh, he is so kind!” answered Princess Mary.
incomprehensible conceptions of freedom and inevitability.
few times in silence, but his eyes glittered feverishly and his lips
Napoleon had assented and had given orders that news should be brought

“How can one push on? They are stuck there, wedged on the bridge, and


wanted nothing more.
valor carry disorder and confusion into the enemy’s ranks, but should

possesses: the feeling which causes a man to perform actions which from
again are all running back somewhere, and I shall run with them, and it,
the other, quite a new reflection of the society in which they had taken
pressed it that terrible evening four days before his death. And in her
“Really? Where is she? I should like very much to see her,” said Pierre.
the study—that was in the old house—and it was dark—we went in and
One night when the old countess, in nightcap and dressing jacket,
draped from side to side of the streets, with huge monograms A and N. In
shopkeeper with red pimples on his cheeks near the nose, and a calm,

young face to look back. A shudder of terror went through him: “No,
“Ah, my dear, my dear!” he began, rising and taking her by both
health of Prince Iván and Countess Mary Alexéevna.

sideways at Princess Mary from a little distance. “You have a maroon
remembered Prince Andrew, prayed for him, and asked God to forgive her

wound it had received at Borodinó. The direct consequence of the battle
village. The Russian Cossacks and bugler and the French hussars looked
bosom and solemnly pointing to the floor at Dron’s feet. “I can see
conquerors appear there have been wars, but this does not prove that the

he watched her. She did go first to her cousin.

least fear any kind of trial, and that if those scoundrels dared attack
little free will that as soon as we know the cause prompting the action
children had interrupted. Countess Mary sat down doing woolwork; Natásha

girls, especially the rich heiresses who were most of them plain.
“Wants to turn on the other side,” whispered the servant, and got up
are... hundreds of lives may depend on it, while there are only two
a word to the questions addressed to him. But on entering Moscow he
Dólokhov and Anatole Kurágin have turned all our ladies’ heads.”
“You warm your back and your belly gets frozen. That’s queer.”

They split up the wood, pressed it down on the fire, blew at it with
shod in a Tartar boot embroidered with silver, and the firm pressure

joys and sorrows of this world—overflowed the great grief within her.
rescued her.... Can you guess?”
understand it so differently. He collected all his strength, to stir and

representative of authority as well as, and even better than, at other

Probably a word of command was given and was followed by the reports of
Stories were whispered of how differently the two Empresses behaved

bushes while the field was coming up on both sides, all trying to head

some wood!” said he to another soldier.
it incredible that men should kill him, at any rate he took his stand at
and I don’t yet see my chessboard clearly. Go!...”
anywhere and wandered from room to room like a shadow, idle and
on the spirits of the company, but no one took any notice of his being
“All right, all right, you can tell us afterwards,” said Princess
his wife with him, and had settled down with her in their covered cart,
“Home!” said Pierre, and despite twenty-two degrees of frost Fahrenheit
tears of sadness and rapture. So the boy also was happy that Pierre had
woke Sónya and told her what she had done. The necessary antidotes had
please...” said a trembling, frightened voice behind him.


meant that of the peoples occupying a small northwesterly portion of a
family and to the crown serfs—those fields and meadows where for
young aide-de-camp with a smile.


used to show at catchplay, now and then turning his good-natured, pale,
In a few days Princess Mary was ready to start. Her equipages were the
Besides this refined selection of society Anna Pávlovna’s receptions

sins to answer for without that and that is why he has been banished.
“How it will be there I don’t know, but all will be well!” thought
to seize hold of Dólokhov’s shirt.
bweak thwough. Give me five hundwed men and I will bweak the line,

Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and, bending his face
somewhat older. Princess Mary was still the same timid, plain maiden
intimate places of her heart, and, mistrustfully at first but afterwards
“And you too!”
and near Moscow.
was of value to suffering humanity, would sit for hours with Pierre
‘Michael,’ he says, ‘come here and bow down to his feet; and you, young
wrapped in paper.
in exactly the same manner. Nesvítski laughed and nudged the others to
had quite abandoned the hope of getting married. She saw the coldness
“Oh, what are you talking about?” said another. “Where is he to
had been sitting there with her other children, and he asked whether

“I don’t know. I can’t tell you, sir. Only think! I am alone in
known participants, but with a more remote event we already see its
afraid I am for him and for myself and about everything!...” Natásha

his empire and in a single reign would have extended Russia from the

his fat chest uncovered, stepping unevenly and timidly in one slippered
“Let me alone; it’s not true!” she cried angrily to him.
himself on his seat.

coming toward him, he saw hounds and a huntsman galloping almost
your chivalry just the same.” He paused. “However, we must get to work.
She told them how afraid she had been of Nicholas because he had on a
“Murderer!” he shouted suddenly to the publican. “Bind him, lads!”
of, and am going to rejoin my regiment, I am giving a farewell supper
something improper. Anatole smiled as though to encourage her.
spy, slave of Buonaparte, spy, get out of my house! Be off, I tell
    CHAPTER XIV
Only by reducing this element of free will to the infinitesimal, that
neck and the corners of her mouth drooped.
away from Petersburg, where he had been spending twenty thousand rubles
world of dreams, where everything was as light and beautiful as in
and stood, hanging her head.

rushed forward and descended the staircase.
“I must have that purse, I tell you,” shouted Denísov, shaking his
to offer their services. Most of those present were elderly, respected
energetic gesture of inquiry with his small white plump hand.

personal characteristics, habits, circumstances, and aims. They were
reach ten, I have no right to assume that the movement of the bells is
in itself false.
“Oh, he loves me so!” said Hélène, who for some reason imagined that

quickly turned away, a scarcely perceptible smile flitting over his


BOOK THREE: 1805
go to see his Highness.



“What has happened?” he asked himself. “I have killed her lover,

Breathless with joy, Pierre ran to the little girl and was going to take
father, the terribly wild cries of her mother that she heard through the
invincibility of the French, and the Minister of War does not even care
But, just because the assistant evidently did not want him to go in,
Sónya burst into hysterical tears and replied through her sobs that
“And I tell you, Rostóv, that you must apologize to the colonel!”
detachment of all) got to his appointed place at the right time. This
Turks eat horseflesh!” He swayed his head. “And the French shall too,
All Moscow talks of nothing but war. One of my two brothers is already

alone... that tremendous fortune... and what is his life worth? It’s a

Within a week the peasants who came with empty carts to carry off
and as he went on became more and more animated. He told them of his
last, which unites in itself the strength of all the former ones, and
angle—so that the left flank was at Shevárdino, the right flank near the
our position, halted behind our Uhlans who were in the front line. To
correspondingly decreased or increased, according to the point of view
was merely a man of the world who had got on and to whom getting on had
on his knees for her hand and her love—uttered at a moment when she was

everywhere, all with the same preoccupied expression and busy with
are not many left of us old friends! That’s why I so value your
“Compassion, love of our brothers, for those who love us and for those
the one below. Natásha jumped on it, sank into the feather bed, rolled

“The hoof’s cracked! That’s nothing. I’ll teach you what to do
succeeds. He sat motionless, looking at the heights visible above
dreary, persistent activity. Davout allowed himself that pleasure when
he felt that this did not forward matters at all. He felt that these
smoothing out the end of her sash while she looked at a corner of the
of dissolution in which all those who are in it are inevitably wiped
rush to obey the summons. “Send Dmítri to me!”
lagging behind it.


take matters in hand, their whole property would be sold by auction and
perspiring, were at work on a huge knoll overgrown with grass to the
“Well, you see, Count, I want some money.”
soldiers were doing something on both sides of it and in the meadow,


view prevailed expressed by Bilíbin—who now in Petersburg was quite at

more and more.
never thought much of him.”
if all the powers of his soul were concentrated on passing the commander
stuck on the front of her little shawl and, still kneeling on the floor,

and without fuss or strain on his part this set things going.
Pávlovna was the representative. And in Hélène’s salon, which Rumyántsev
“I cannot argue about it,” replied Prince Andrew coldly, but he
The remains of our regiment which had been in action rapidly formed up
the knife, placed it under the head of his bed, and, seating himself
Having abandoned the conception of the ancients as to the divine
company, your honor. I don’t know where... such bad luck!”
CHAPTER X
scarcely discernible figures was Napoleon. At last those mounted men
“I know, I expect you thought of him,” said Nicholas, smiling as
Soon after this there came into the dark chamber to fetch Pierre, not
of hostility to one another, but each camp retained its own tendency.
idleness, but would grow fat and die. The third thing—what else was
“Fetch them back, fetch them back!” said Count Orlóv with sudden
simultaneously. The gate was again hidden by smoke.
clearer think of me!” He took her hand and kissed it. “I shall be happy
now his friendship with Andrew, his misfortune with his wife, and above
same not to send them?”
“Quand un officier fait sa ronde, les sentinelles ne demandent pas le
When, having bought the coat merely with the object of taking part among
of him. “We French are merciful after victory, but we do not pardon

them for their boorishness.
“My dear boy, what a way to look at it! You know Sónya has nothing and
“Then am I to order those large sterlets?” asked the steward.
“Ah, my dear! He is so rich, and we are so poor!”
Hélène. “Separate! That’s a thing to frighten me with!”
our last two unfortunate campaigns, and with drawing up a proposal for a
wish and, receiving a justification, presents itself as the result of

he chanced to meet Dólokhov’s handsome insolent eyes, Pierre felt
well, only a little bruised just here,” he added, pointing with a
“Well, I have Pryánichnikov serving under me, a splendid man, a



as he said this. She realized that if she said a word about his not
return from Erfurt. Hélène spoke of him as “mon page” and treated
fashion, a long bent whip in his hand, and that look of independence
face. “Let him see whether I am a coward!” he thought.
up myself.’ And so it was reported to the count, who sent for the man.
his pockets stood staring at her, motionless and silent.

and insignificance—particularly acute by contrast with the sphere of
definitions of space, time, and thought, and, having deduced the
an escort, on the pretext of inspecting the army and the scene of the

it immoral and humiliating could not resist the temptations of the
“Yes, yes, go on!” said Natásha. “Where is he?”

would be particularly pleasant to him to dishonor my name and ridicule
CHAPTER XXXV

was a sinner who loved her father and little nephew more than God.
in Petersburg. Natásha with animated and excited face was telling him

Polish sergeant.

from having to urge the men on or anything of that kind, could hardly
“I’d be glad to sit beside you and rest: I’m tired; but you see
the countess’ repeatedly expressed wish that Nicholas should marry
a woman and, like a chained convict, you lose all freedom! And all you
applied himself to the bottle of Bordeaux. He wrapped the bottle up
and prolonged yells. On the other table, round which many people were
lives was to cure, and they received money for it and had spent the best

distinct group, but who were now for the most part scattered about the
greatest glory of the Russian army. Many heroes have been described to
“I am Russian,” he said quickly.

his head and again assuming his former tone of a dull, unreasoning, but
who was not a military man at all, and Pfuel himself, who, as Prince
and she loves me....”

resumed, to the accompaniment of unreasoning, merry, childlike laughter.
    CHAPTER I
expedition.... But what’s the southern army to do? Prussia is
plainness of speech, uttering the word amant as casually as any other
Andrew, who remained in the porch and listened to the general’s report.
lowered the French eagle he was holding before the Preobrazhénsk
talking too loudly and vehemently with the abbé, so she hurried to the
to pieces without me—everyone was pulling his own way. But I succeeded
with a calm smile that she was not so stupid as to be jealous: ‘Let


and shouting, while the man and woman on the stage—who represented
vividly pictured herself as Prince Andrew’s wife, and the scenes of
determination he had to give in, and stop while carriages passed in,
“About your sister,” ejaculated Denísov testily.
time to reply, took the repetition for a denial, the more readily as he
and grant us Thy salvation; make the hearts of Thy servants to rejoice
red campfires were growing paler and dying down. High up in the light
to me that the numbers three and seven are the basis of everything. He
Potëmkins or Suvórovs left to oppose him; but he was also convinced
much—informing him of her intention to marry N.N. and of her having

“He has spoken? Yes? He has spoken?” she repeated.
horsemen could be descried. The officers said that either Napoleon or
was slipping away from him.
But the happy day came, and on that memorable Sunday, when, dressed in

no clear solution of what puzzled him so, the wheel of fortune in the
personally it would be a pleasure to hand over the supreme command
son. In some places she raised her voice, in others she whispered,
he lay down on the leather sofa in front of a round table, put his big
At the end of the meeting the Grand Master with irony and ill-will
The Grand Master proposed that the last duty should be performed,
begged to be allowed to swim across the river before the Emperor’s
having abandoned all the rest and all his cannon, and having crossed the
“What do you think of this?” said he, unrolling a piece of stuff like a
awaiting the boyars so long in vain: that there were drunken mobs left
generally, and in the cold, repellent glance the Emperor gave him, he
everyone—especially to one so closely bound to me—and that I must
“Yes, I know you have made peace with the Turks without obtaining
was told that the prince had gone to the nursery.
tradesman angrily. “Please step inside, your honor!”
hand; and the same feeling of pity, tenderness, and love took possession
eyes. His shriveled old hands were folded and on the finger of one of
awaiting a reply. He frowned.
distant, most intimate, memories rose in his imagination: he remembered
and captured by the French, and hid in the forests without unsaddling,
looked very thoughtful and tender. With his hands behind him he paced
are known to us while we are conscious of others we cannot comprehend.
Moreau would have been a prisoner if Suvórov had had a free hand; but


their journey. She answered him and continued her chatter.
of meat stuck on a ramrod. His sleeves were rolled up and his sinewy,
was a piece of tow in one of them, could not help hearing; but it
“It is all very well for Rostóv, whose father sends him ten thousand
general approval were founded with which, despite court influences, the
an officer and men began to run toward it. A general who was standing

“But such a... such a... never happened to me before!” she said.
“Yes, that’s it! That’s just what I said to him,” put in Nicholas, who

unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.

and affronts matter? I love and forgive everybody now.”
Austerlitz to the year 1813. At Austerlitz he remained last at the
“The potatoes are grand!” he said once more. “Eat some like that!”
different lodgings. As soon as the men of the various regiments began
door of the adjoining hut as if expecting something unpleasant to emerge

of the reception room and peeped through the crack, returned flourishing
by a scarlet-liveried footman that morning, ran as follows:
At last the Emperor, tired of futile expectation, his actor’s instinct

In actual life each historic event, each human action, is very clearly
alone applying her handkerchief to her eyes. At last she rang.
The “man of great merit,” who was still a novice in court circles,
we’ll rest. The Tsar won’t forget your service. It is hard for you, but
“From what I have heard,” said Pierre, blushing and breaking into
He was singing in passionate tones, gazing with his sparkling

the Russian general entered, and after glancing over his spectacles at
Denísov, who had come out of the study into the dancing room with his
“To endure war is the most difficult subordination of man’s freedom to

Kutúzov with his staff and all of us count for nothing. Everything is
affairs, took advantage of the armistice to get leave to visit Denísov
he would be blamed for not having executed sooner the important order
unconsciously lifted the upper lip of his pretty little mouth just


With a long overcoat on his exceedingly stout, round-shouldered body,
men, so that, flushed and happy, and passing on her superfluous partners

“He is here now: tell him... to for... forgive me!” She stopped and


voice.
weariness of tone, “it is almost impossible for me to do what you
listen, while waiting till it would be time to leave. Her task was
They all raised their heads to listen, and out of the forest into the

point... Come, how are you?” asked Rostóv.
his own way, gave an order. No one said anything definite, but the rumor
which it rests and which no human power can destroy, is the preservation

“I owe my life to you and offer you my friendship. A Frenchman never
extraordinary movement of millions of people. Men leave their customary

I have thought and thought again about your affair. You see, if you

“And what devil made me go to that wat?” (an officer nicknamed
own—as though he did not understand his words.
in fact, Murat, now called “King of Naples.” Though it was quite
Crosses he had in his pocket into the battery for the first soldiers to
“Do you know?” said Pierre, as if suddenly struck by a happy
are sixty or seventy, without a gray hair or the loss of a tooth, as
but as things are now one can’t answer for anything.”
him had come to pass; but Nicholas was as much astonished as if it were
and a convoy of Croats. Beside Kutúzov sat an Austrian general, in
room, where you will be ranged side by side with a court lackey and an
and sometimes laughed. Nearest of all to the commander in chief walked
trying to bar the road. Infantry regiments, we are told, advanced to the
state. She answered questions at random, began sentences she did not
At the end of August the Rostóvs received another letter from Nicholas.

who, angry and frightened, strode energetically along with downcast
“Voyons, pas de bêtises!” * he cried.
to show that they are not at all impatient for their food. The host and
Anatole Kurágin with an arm thrown across the back of his chair,
about to smile, and once on coming out of the chapel Prince Andrew and
The countess shrugged her shoulders.
came up to Pierre. “Ah, Kaysárov!” said Borís, addressing him with an
absolutely necessary.
satin dancing shoes did their work swiftly, lightly, and independently
will they cross Pomerania?”
and come to us without fear. Inhabitants, return with confidence to your
“Then why are you here? You should have gone on long ago, now you







It is terrible to think.... This is my son,” she added, indicating

peasants at work on the battlefield, with their queer, clumsy boots
and Prince Andrew understood the insignificance of the people with whom
down the Nikítski Boulevard.

prescribed small doses of a certain drug to produce a certain effect;

sea of history remains calm the ruler-administrator in his frail bark,
capture of transport trains on the Smolénsk road, and by the battle of
being the center of our position and where rows of fragrant new-mown hay
anything. There was something particularly pathetic and resolute in

of soldiers with brick-red hands, necks, and faces, who were splashing
strength and health, of which he had till then been unconscious, and
stretched along the highroad in the midst of a young copse in which were
wretch—that’s a fact!”
Sónya made some reluctant reply.
round-faced peasant gravely, pointing with a significant wink at the

the advance because on learning that Napoleon was there he had quite
if he were prepared that instant to kill himself and everyone else, but
the snort of a horse, the crack of a whip, or the whine of a straggling
Gerásim looked cautiously into the study several times and saw Pierre
regret, and disillusionment. It seemed to him that this was not
him and said: “Terrible for you, but not for me! You know that for me
“Oh dear, what am I thinking about? I’ve mixed everything up. One

Timókhin looked about in confusion, not knowing what or how to answer
the Tverskáya Street rode the hussar with mustaches... I thought about
ascertained? No one was or is able to foresee in what condition our or
Nicholas was spending the last of his leave at home. A fourth letter had
herself in a difficult position.

not arrived. She suffered more now than during her first days in Moscow.
formidable wolfhounds, who had, however, grown fat like their master
again quarreled with Bonaparte and had made constitutions and unmade


because his advice was useful and the Emperor Alexander held him in high


On the appointed day Prince Andrew entered Count Arakchéev’s waiting

“He is just the same as ever,” replied Anna Mikháylovna,
furiously up, and then all eyes were turned on an approaching sleigh

be sure to arouse him.


now both her daughters were settled, her only wish was to see him
good and beneficent? Their activity would not have existed: there would
wrongs, the movement of troops into Prussia—undertaken (as it seemed to
When he awoke next morning the major-domo came to inform him that a


as real as any other recollection. She not only remembered what she had
promotion, Nicholas said that he kissed his father’s and mother’s
would take place on this side of it...
battalion came onto the bridge. Only Denísov’s squadron of hussars
with uncovered white head and puffy face showing the white ball of the
crows flying from Moscow across the field, and when afterwards light
not ready. He did not wish to deprive them of the pleasure of giving him


formality, but they winked behind his back and tried to mislead him at
“Do you speak French?” the officer asked again, keeping at a distance
when she had seen her guests out.
you ravish quite...” The Emperor passed on to the drawing room, the
intense over the whole field, especially to the left where Bagratión’s
rehearsing, and began telling him how he had already been in a battle


On hearing that sound Natásha put down the stocking, leaned nearer to
a decision had to be taken regarding a domestic serf, especially if one

the new homestead he was constructing and its buildings, but even here,

of the French came from all sides, and in one village, ten miles from

away.
constantly considered it a duty to assure Pierre that he was greatly
And yet it is difficult to imagine an historical character whose
helplessly on the sofa.

months.
At the sight of the tortured Frenchman and the crowd surrounding the
her powers since morning had been concentrated on ensuring that they
merrily.
purity, and not the serfs’ backs and foreheads, which, beat and shave
Evidently he had wanted to talk. “And why didn’t he call me? Why didn’t

organized and strong and has withdrawn to Drissa without suffering
something was lying, stood a tallow candle with a long, thick, and
like a mushroom.
the line that had so sharply divided the two armies?” he asked himself
in their power.
Valúevo with Colonel Fabvier, the former from Paris and the latter from
are in her features and expression!” thought he as he looked at her and

pillows one at a time and shaking them.

each event presents itself as partly free and partly compulsory.
With each fresh blow less and less chance of life remained for those not
steps, her workbag on her arm, and gaily spreading out her dress sat
not realizing to whom she was speaking. Her maternal instinct told her

to Likhachëv; then he flourished the saber, tested it, and sheathed
Fourthly, it would have been senseless to wish to take captive the
misunderstandings that occurred between us and should wish you not to
Tolly, not so much as a man but as minister of war and commander in
the neck and applied his foot and knee to his behind with great agility

though all were in a conspiracy of silence. The men who set the tone
word would effectively prove to Prince Vasíli the invalidity of his
general grumbled at his wife when she asked how his leg was. “Oh, the
of fellow. As for the past two years people have amused themselves

sov’weign the Empewah in other ways. Have we fo’gotten the waising of
except in the army; I am not a diplomat or a government clerk.—I




mouth!” said Bilíbin, and the mop of hair on his head moved with
“All right!” said Dólokhov, having finished the addition. “All
keen-sighted a companion. “You know, you see right through people.

thick spot of paint representing the highest light in the portrait,
orderly’s tone, dismounted, gave his horse to a dispatch runner, and
could for himself and his army, as he had done previously and as he did
“It’s all the same to me,” he said. “I only want to see whether

danced that evening. He had never danced like that in Moscow and would
man, and that in the duel with Bezúkhov, Pierre was right and Dólokhov
her, and instead of putting on speed as she usually did Mílka suddenly
bad people but of people such as myself,” thought she.
directed to pushing on to Moscow at the end of the summer, that is, to
“Really, Papa, I believe Prince Bagratión worried himself less before
Granted that were they competent they might be made use of,” continued

commander in chief here, and if all is lost it is for me to perish with
“If I may take the liberty, your excellency, it would be a good thing.”
“Shall we have three cold dishes then?” asked the cook.
cannot believe that the strongest and wisest of its people have no
of receiving the news of his son’s intentions had occurred to him in
you understand? I love him!”
force of this or that detachment. Sometimes—when there is not a coward

along the Ryazán road and nearer to its supplies. Subsequently the
among the Russian people. But no one at the time foresaw (what now seems
During the whole of that period Napoleon, who seems to us to have been
dress and weepers. She softly approached Princess Mary, sighed, kissed

Prince Hippolyte was lolling in a lounge chair with his legs over its

four weeks.

“Is it worth while noticing trifles?” He reined in his horse with
mamma.”
he repeated, accentuating the u: “I think, however, now that he lays
the people in so strange a manner, contrary to the Tsar’s wish, to
her eyes became serious. At that moment she was oblivious of her



as if to explain such a question.
the laws of history lie, and that as yet not a millionth part as much

Emperor, kings, and dukes—whose capture would have been in the highest
event, acted in an altogether different manner from Kutúzov.
assume the title of commander in chief, but disposed of all the armies;
you!”
his face, which had been scratched till it bled by his falling against
replied Borís, betraying neither annoyance at the prince’s brusque

    CHAPTER XI

The general trend of the campaign was rarely spoken of, partly because
In a rather low room lit by one candle sat the princess and with her
“Gentlemen, the dispositions for tomorrow—or rather for today, for

thumping the table; “and ve must tie for our Emperor, and zen all vill
Rostóv with shrinking terror. His pale and mud-stained face—fair and
In Natásha Prince Andrew was conscious of a strange world completely
it specially pathetic.

out his elbows in a menacing way. But within the Trinity Gateway he
“Haven’t I said I’m not going to gwovel?” Denísov interrupted

“Count!” exclaimed the timid yet theatrical voice of Vereshchágin in the
standing on the dam wiping himself with a towel, felt confused at seeing
A solemn meeting of the lodge of the second degree was convened, at
But in spite of that she seemed to be disillusioned about everything and
to remember what they hear to enrich their minds and when opportunity

defending her husband and attacking her brother. Her defense was weak
Rays of gentle light shone from her large, timid eyes. Those eyes lit
and began replaiting it. Her long, thin, practiced fingers rapidly
against the sovereign’s wishes and who had removed the Grand Duke and

Peter the footman made some remark to the coachman; the latter assented.
added he, munching a pie in his moist-lipped handsome mouth, “would be
all sides awaiting a word from him.
“Mamma, tell us what happened to you in the barn.”
“No, it’s not that. I never leave off loving you. And one couldn’t love
from the affairs of the Petersburg lodges, and lived almost entirely in
have to share that fate. Still less did Pierre think about himself. The
appeared to him, the gloomier seemed his own.


was more open and level than elsewhere. It was evident to anyone,
dashboard with snow, Anatole and his constant companion Makárin dashed
killed, you are a fool and are lost for certain. But go with the firm
accustomed to win in their battles,” he concluded his evidently

“Who was that? The Military Governor himself?” was being asked at
urging of horses, and the swearing of soldiers, orderlies, and officers.
in hand.
on every face and only Kutúzov’s angry grunts and occasional cough
soldiers ran from the fires, thrust their pipes into their boots, their

He lay down on the sofa meaning to fall asleep and forget all that
Dólokhov, the bottle of rum still in his hand, jumped onto the window
“All well?” asked Rostóv, drawing away his arm.
same. “Off, in God’s name!” said Efím, putting on his hat. “Start!” The

of the Azóv and Podólsk infantry and the Pávlograd hussars—was
Prince Andrew could not understand.

CHAPTER VI
to fly as fast as possible along the nearest, familiar road. Napoleon
were to be severe with her and to forbid it ... goodness knows what they
is so unreasonable, the count himself I mean. The Razumóvskis wanted
of the French had ceased, the Russian army, which had been continually
Rostóvs, with whom she stayed when in the town and where her darling
nothing resembled reality. The big dark blotch might really be the
this speech how they could best handle the master for their own ends.
“I? I? What of me? Leave me out of the question. I’m not going to
“In the meadows... in the meadows!” he heard, accompanied by whistling
on externals. He did not think of doubting Freemasonry itself, but

were being set out for eighty people; and looking at the footmen, who
entrusted to him, addressed Pierre sternly.
“It’s lucky for him that he escaped me; but I’ll find him!” she said in
some way and knowing that this was impossible was ready to cry. The Tsar
will not rest until they have gained their end, and are prepared if
know it’s impossible to speak of it now. But I want to be a brother to
were waiting for them to come out.
pricking its ears at the noise and looking at the lights. The shouting
So it came about that at the council at Málo-Yaroslávets, when the
cease seeing you; and if you won’t do this, I will. I will write to
one takes, I don’t care about that.”

“My dear Princess Catherine Semënovna,” began Prince Vasíli
that at dinner he gave orders that Mademoiselle Bourienne should be
head while you were asleep. Forgive me, Daddy,’ he says, ‘for Christ’s
“Killed?” cried Denísov, recognizing from a distance the unmistakably
imagination. Pierre maintained the contrary, and as his mental faculties
hitting men and that afterwards someone had shouted “Cavalry!” and
voices of new arrivals in the vestibule.
Bonaparte like? How did he impress you?”
anger, but I did not sufficiently repent. Afterwards Borís Drubetskóy

man.
of Austria, and having, as his historian tells us, tenderly embraced the
some tea?” he added.

still sat softly running his fingers over the strings, evidently
“He? That’s a tradesman, that is to say, he’s the restaurant
gratefully, she let him see the hidden, kindly sides of her character.
Pierre saw that Platón did not want to understand what the Frenchman
“How are you now?” said Princess Mary, herself surprised at what she was
person was a gray-bearded old man in a woman’s cloak, with a tall
we let our feeble human minds roam, the better we shall please God, who
even make any attempt to get leave of absence or to retire from the
reach that eternal, quiet haven, where there is neither sorrow nor
The Russians did not seek out the best position but, on the contrary,



speak. He spoke slowly, with assurance that he would be listened to, and
an absence of cause. However inaccessible to us may be the cause of the
to another. “How evidently he belongs to the best society,” said she
present. “‘What pleasure is there to be’ is not Russian!”
Prince Andrew returned to Petersburg.
Princess Mary that he loved her.
involuntarily describe it as resulting from an exercise of power—and say

Smolénsk and thought only of how to advance farther, though as we now
“Yes, it has happened luckily for you,” he said, raising the open
at the head of them Rostóv recognized Napoleon. It could be no one
ourselves to risks we must not risk our children.”
    CHAPTER XVI

robust he ordered about those weaker than himself. The soldier
you wouldn’t go, but I knew that today is the sort of day when you
Whether he understood that screaming was useless or whether he thought

“I promised to pay tomorrow,” said Nicholas.
but joyous and eager crowd down the hill at their disordered foe.

resemble the activity we imagine to ourselves when we sit at ease in
“That comes of your talking!” said she.
Moscow; for he foresees the encounters that would result from his way
though embracing her.
about four miles away, where Napoleon was then stationed. Beyond Valúevo
must not give way. He sprang forward and upset an old woman who was
Natásha was sixteen and it was the year 1809, the very year to which
In the silence that ensued, the snoring of those who had fallen asleep
the field toward the very spot where the wolf had disappeared. The hazel

from his pocket began asking the officer in how far the road before them
sheet spread over the hay on the side nearest the door.
“Because I am accustomed to doing everything accurately,” said Pétya.
rushing backwards and forwards near it, and he saw two of them and a

“Devil take ‘em!” he muttered, while his head was still covered by
gun carriage. A Cossack who accompanied him had handed him a knapsack
spirited impression.
follows:
Traitors!” he thought, without clearly defining who the villains and
the column, gave him the order to advance.

the men.
to do anything you disapproved of. I believe in you completely. You

of deep bass voices, and in the intervals sighs and the shuffling of
“He’s a creature that wriggles in anywhere!” was the answer. “He



Dólokhov’s clear, cold glance met Rostóv as soon as he entered the



“The Ápsherons must be stopped, your excellency,” cried he. But at
know, madam. God is my witness, I did not know you had honored us with
are being deceived, my instinct tells me of negotiations with France and
make him go on.
a slipper for his left foot. With a childlike smile of embarrassment,
his young master, with the fox tied to his crupper. While still at a
“Andrew, do leave off,” said Princess Mary. “Don’t tell him,

life appeared in a new light. “Why do I strive, why do I toil in this
places. As always happens the men, starting cheerfully, began to halt;
I hated in my life? And of them all, I loved and hated none as I did

“Yes, indeed,” replied the princess with a sigh. “So he may have
“What is it?” he asked.
there, and this, together with his past and his intellect and his
columns would have been visible quite far off, they were not to be seen.

business,” he said coldly.
way from the Dorogomílov suburb to the Krémlin, and was now sitting in
the current rumors from all sides and gave superficial and hasty orders
repeating to himself at each alternate step, “Left... left...
“I am so sorry for the poor count,” said the visitor. “He is in
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
“But you didn’t see it!”
“I am afraid,” said Pierre, smiling, and wavering between the
“Is it something very bad for me? What is it?” persisted Natásha with
improved by the change. Probably Prince Andrew’s thought interested
sign that this was exactly what he had desired and expected. Turning
and, from the first day, the people concerned themselves to get this
to be limited just because he is not conscious of it except as free.

off his eyes and glanced around him. The room was in black darkness,
This reply is quite satisfactory if we believe that the power was given

these other madmen to be free.”
Andrew was galloping along in a post chaise enjoying the feelings of a

derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project

“Another forfeit for a Gallicism,” said a Russian writer who was
did not notice that look and moved hastily away.
Rostóv stopped and, clenching his fists, suddenly and sternly turned on
“Well, how d’you do, my dear fellow?” said Dolgorúkov, who was
an expression of irritable impotence. “What for? If I were a wobber I
“What is the German for ‘shelter’?”

the Tsar!”
business letters, and walked over to the granaries, cattle yards and
“To whomever Your Majesty commands.”
Pétya clenched his teeth and looked around, throwing back his head and
of the infinite goodness of the Creator, whose every action, though

And there was so much kindliness and simplicity in his singsong voice

companion’s face, saw her attentive and kindly gaze fixed on him, and,
a very bad way of deciding whether a battle was won or lost. Those who
In historical works on the year 1812 French writers are very fond of
produced and a cellaret and half a bottle of rum, and having asked Mary
and in that contemplation seemed to have forgotten all she had wished to
Count Rostopchín, Valúev, and Narýshkin. Rostopchín was describing
grand-patience as usual, when Pierre and Natásha came into the drawing

and still is written about the Berëzina, on the French side this is only

returned from the council, tired and exhausted but eager and proud
circle from which we must break a way out.”

buckwheat porridge, and choke themselves with cabbage soup. They are all
“Now we’ll go into action. Oh, when he takes it in hand himself, things

could not break away from her, and that though it would be a terrible


Pierre sat opposite Dólokhov and Nicholas Rostóv. As usual, he ate and
from la grippe; grippe being then a new word in St. Petersburg, used
travel, and chatted carelessly, as a famous, self-confident surgeon who
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
replied by asking him to go, but to fix a definite date for his return.
up round her head, leaving only a little of the face uncovered. “And
and unexpectedly again began to cry.


The enemy is beaten, and tomorrow we shall drive him from the sacred
arrival, thought in another way. Of course, she, a handsome young woman

    CHAPTER XX

with a bashful and awkward gesture not at all like a military salute
wish?”
Boguchárovo, his occupations in the country, his journey to Ryazán;
Bourienne with a radiant face that said: “I know nothing, I am the
“Our sovereign the Emperor will be here in a moment,” said Rostopchín.
the rules—as if there were any rules for killing people. In spite of the
“Drubetskóy has proposed?”
kind offer which was intended expressly for her. When she came ready
Our false conception that an event is caused by a command which precedes

under his pillow a paper he had received from the commission and the



to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided that
his father’s part of the house. Entering the drawing room, where the
pale and then blushing.
had gone, and so had Princess Mary. Of his intimate friends only the
glancing up at him from under her brows, smiling, and almost crying from
she did not try to hide the fact that she was no longer sad, but bright
as you may, always remain the same backs and foreheads.”
approaching enemy farther off. At the same instant the sun came fully
“Papa! Pa-pa!” he called after him, sobbing, “forgive me!” And
Once a Frenchman Tíkhon was trying to capture fired a pistol at him
clean, and in cloth covers carefully tied with tapes.

and you want to go into the army! There, there, I tell you,” and the
The gentlemen assembled at Bilíbin’s were young, wealthy, gay society
“What nonsense...”
the little Rostóva. I do not think my brother will ever marry again,
been there at seven in the morning,” returned Bilíbin with a smile.
my engagements with Your Majesty, your troops have crossed the Russian



After five o’clock it was only at the Augesd Dam that a hot cannonade
and so it might be supposed that all necessary arrangements would be
in the manifesto. In all these words she saw only that the danger
go through your performance.”
cities wondered at her, laughed privately at her rudenesses, and told
the balance of power, and the latter, evidently interested by the young
his shoulders. “Women, my dear fellow; women!”
twelve men in garments like those he had already seen. Some of them
opponents and practical men of experience in warfare had to say, and
delicate dark down was just perceptible, was too short for her teeth,

Number one jumped briskly aside. The gun rang out with a deafening


Natásha could not remain calm, seeing him in such a plight. She began

it away with you.... What does it matter to you whether our homes are
of ecclesiastical, patriotic eloquence. Prince Vasíli himself, famed for
higher, his eyes shone with the light of life, and with swift steps
threateningly toward him.
brain—that’s all that’s left me!” And at the same time he said
“Puff!”—suddenly a round compact cloud of smoke was seen merging from
up to their gallery, addressing the first violin:
“Come! Balagá is here.”
“Our business is to do our duty, to fight and not to think! That’s
numb in the sharp frost so that I threw down the reins—‘Catch hold
each face, appraising the possibilities of establishing intimacy with
the crops and burn wood to their hearts’ content. I don’t order it

Toward dusk the cannonade began to subside. Alpátych left the cellar
Princess Mary rose and moved to the door, then stopped and said:

was retreating to the Ryazán road beyond Moscow. This was not news to
virtue and vice, are only greater or lesser degrees of freedom.

deep wrinkles would crease his cheeks. His small, deep-set eyes always
morning, when he went to call at Rostopchín’s he met there a courier
Princess Mary.
     *Kutúzov.
a queen, and that it exists to perpetuate its race. A botanist notices
These words he repeated to everyone without exception or variation, and
looked eagerly toward his eyes, waiting for the look for which she
and drawing up again next moment when her face broke into a smile of
galloped after the general, causing the staff officers to smile as they

pour le Roi de Prusse!”
he never could appreciate it. No, mon cousin,” she added with a sigh,
in the world, it seemed to him, depended entirely on his will.
his company. The crowd of Russians and Frenchmen began to disperse. They
at the same time simply, naturally, and forcibly. Now in 1812, to anyone
not yet dressed.
So he comes up to the old man like this, and falls down at his feet!


but powerful. Nicholas had been struck by the peculiar moral beauty he
town next day. Pierre still considered that it would be a useful and
of right and wrong. For the “great” man nothing is wrong, there is no

    CHAPTER XIII

Pierre, the one who had behaved so improperly at Anna Pávlovna’s
“Shall I serve them up?”
what am I to do if I love nothing but fame and men’s esteem? Death,
She held herself as erect, told everyone her opinion as candidly,
did not go, for the unknown cause which had previously impelled them to

of suffering and death for himself. At that moment he did not desire
“I have seen as much before now, mate!”
I do not yet know. There will be time enough to think about love when I
heard a rustle behind him and a shadow appeared under the curtain of

the following day. On that day, June 27, the preliminaries of peace were
and in two twists of the hand he breaks them to smithereens and installs
fault with us.”
“We’ve been told to keep order, and that no one is to leave their homes
when he was there Count Nicholas would cease going every day to attend
important and unimportant, all of whom he knew, as if they were all
for the countess.”
been devoted to describing the actions of various kings, commanders,
While waiting for the announcement of his appointment to the committee
their blessing.
taken prisoner at Boulogne, and why, later on, were those criminals whom


It was quite impossible to understand these sounds. The doctor thought
Bilíbin. “It’s not treachery nor rascality nor stupidity: it is
he is Bóry’s godfather—and allow him something for his maintenance,

himself and repeating:
historic leaders but in the nations themselves, what significance have
with a supple movement, got up, coughed, and went off to another part of
anyone in particular, began to say how difficult it was to carry out

in lace-frilled drawers, and feet in low slippers—was just at that
continued his work.
of Moscow, he proposed to move troops from the right to the left flank
The curtain rose again. Anatole left the box, serene and gay. Natásha


“Yes, yes!” some voices answered, laughing.
water for you for nothing. So here are our accounts all settled,” said
and dozens of carts with wounded men began at the invitation of the
Moscow was no longer, as it had been, to conquer, but merely to keep
love of one’s neighbor and Christianity—and all this in the presence of
yet there need only be a discussion and she has no words of her own
the gate and by Morel, who came to say that some Württemberg hussars had
cards. They broke off and rose as she entered.


meeting. Parties were formed, some accusing Pierre of Illuminism, others
“What you said just now was splendid!” said his partner Julie.
she must not say this and that it would be useless to do so. She only
someone’s orderly passed through the gateway, splashing through the mud,
For a reply to these questions the common sense of mankind turns to the
for him to arrange his new life without receiving thirty thousand in
all remained as of old, the inner relations of all these people had
“All right, all right. We’ll talk it over,” replied Prince Andrew.
“I believe it, I believe it, fwiend, and I share and appwove...”
The midwife was already on her way to meet her, rubbing her small, plump
Empewah? Ah we to take Smolénsk as our patte’n? If the noble awistocwacy
and grieved had he chosen not to see them. These different
The French historians, describing the condition of the French army
vanguard, rewards were promised, and the men received a double ration of

The young people, at the countess’ instigation, gathered round the
Almost every time a new carriage drove up a whisper ran through the
some twenty men of his suite. These gentlemen talked among themselves
contemptuous. Everything that reminded him of his past was repugnant to
Meanwhile the staff officer standing in front pointed out something to
“To enter Russia without declaring war! I will not make peace as long as

And not for that day and hour alone were the mind and conscience
can be no doubt about the victory for the battlefield remains in the
comforting. This something was a most subtle spiritual deduction from a
And without waiting for an answer from the sentinel, who had stepped
“Oh, but it’s so... You take everything so to heart,” said Pierre, and
CHAPTER I
On the high ground where the enemy was, the smoke of a cannon rose,
the church.
that, he had experience enough to know that nothing happens in war at
he remembered the peasants and Dron the village elder, and mentally
    CHAPTER VIII
(though the Council of Filí, at which it was decided to abandon Moscow,
lively, and she did not talk to her husband. When they left the table
more that she with such a soul not only belonged to him but was part of
could be had even for the carriages, much less for the carting.
Rostóvs. Not by a single word had Nicholas alluded to the fact that
selling their cattle and moving in whole families toward the southeast.
    CHAPTER XIII
Natásha’s illness was so serious that, fortunately for her and for
nails and spat a little for luck as she returned to the drawing room.
reasons. The fact is that other positions they had passed were stronger,
“Why do you say that?” replied Princess Mary. “Why do you say that,
from Smolénsk to Borodinó. The French army pushed on to Moscow, its
“May I stay a little longer?” he said, letting his stout body sink
“For not dilly-dallying and not hanging to a woman’s apron strings.
a pack of hounds and huntsmen on ahead to find the quarry, mounted his
There were several prisoners from the French army in Orël, and the
they could not fail to vanquish anyone, be it whom it might: so thought

his coachman.
a fortnight ago he would have had a paymaster’s clerk at Yúkhnovna
The princess was apparently vexed at not having anyone to be angry with.
While they were strong we didn’t spare ourselves, but now we may even
“No, but I must. It may be arrogant of me, but still it is best to say

emitting a smoke ring.
there?” he said, turning to the door as he heard a tread of heavy

Hendríkhovna’s plump little hands with their short and not overclean
for Mademoiselle Bourienne, and subsided into his study.
with Napoleon if, contrary to expectations, these negotiations were
to hers. A woman came from the bedroom with a frightened face and became



the front. I held my sword in my left hand, Count. All our family—the
enormous house and its lodges were full of people and more than twenty
lighting a fire.
brought for the night to a large house on the Zúbov Rampart that was
officer into his hut to warm him, and when the messenger returned and

accompany him everywhere. The disfavor into which he falls with the

at two o’clock that night he sent for his secretary, Shishkóv, and told
who seemed to be on his side understood him in their own way with
eyes expressed entreaty, shame at having to ask, fear of a refusal, and
occurs—the continuity of movement in time) and do not lose sight of the

entering the field of analysis the universal historians stop halfway.
the old count’s death, now after staying a short time in Orël—where she
wished to and because he was very clever and a genius.
that same evening there was to be one of the balls that Iogel (the


managed from my first promotion.” (Berg measured his life not by years



ram did not happen accidentally, and will no longer need the conceptions
and the flight of the French without further conflicts, is one of the
greatest glory of the Russian people. The lady who, afraid of being

“Yes, sir. He knows where to stand. He understands the matter so well
don’t understand. Perhaps Princess Elizabeth and Princess Mary know.
“Leave off talking nonsense,” said the countess.
girl might have done.
married secretly.
“To please Moscow girls nowadays one has to be melancholy. He is very
private and had not seen fit to recognize him. But now that Kutúzov had
“I don’t even know what is in this paper,” said the younger of

seemed to hear left... left... left.
that during their stay of four days they might have learned where
“Captain, there is soup and a leg of mutton in the kitchen,” said he.
you select to be your worthy helpmeet in Masonry.” And after a pause,
began taking him with him when he went out on expeditions and had him

will in Pierre’s favor are among the count’s papers, then, my dear

one trivial topic to another and repeatedly broke off. He stayed so long
offense. “It was all my fault, and Andrew was only joking.”
“ti-ti” once more. At the same time he felt that above his face, above
“The French,” replied Ilyín jestingly, “and here is Napoleon
the count aside and implored him with tears to take her away quickly,
that day and Natásha was sitting with him. In the next room sat the
Fires were lighted and the talk became more audible. Captain Túshin,


prearranged sentence.
these sayings and doings “the Revolution”; then they give a detailed
him.
On the twenty-fourth the weather cleared up after a spell of rain, and
Alexander Prince Vasíli had risen to high position and honors. And now,
nothing about it and have not thought about it. Moscow is chiefly busy

“I should not be doing my duty, Count,” he said in timid tones,
    CHAPTER XXI
over like a ball. The hare arched his back and bounded off yet more
But learning just as certainly that his will is subject to laws, he does
When after a bachelor supper he rose with his amiable and kindly smile,
At such moments something like a pride of sacrifice gathered in her
chestnut Donéts, and whistling to his own leash of borzois, set off
up, invited him to his house in Petersburg, and now... she has come here

growing excited. “What about your son, your sister, and your
second of September.

fallen, and an old trooper on the flank, a noncommissioned officer who
others, only now have I understood all the happiness of life. No, I
accompanies the presence of a betrothed couple. Often when all sitting

think, Count? The next day it was not even mentioned in the Orders of
“Look out, your soles will fly off!” shouted the red-haired man,

“That must be very interesting,” said Dessalles. “Prince Andrew is in a

her know the state of affairs and the extent of the danger to which
“Good morning, lads!” said the count briskly and loudly. “Thank you for
“Count, be so good as to allow me... for God’s sake, to get into some
since the time when he thought his son had been killed, he did not think
is Denísov!”
never says anything stupid. She says little, but what she does say is
and the hollows on both sides of the Kolochá.
national character. In such actions, instead of two crowds opposing
presented a more cheerful and animated aspect. This was because all who

indicating her to the gentlemen, said: “Voilà Marie!” Princess Mary
the streets were crowded with them. In the streets, around carts that
later he heard footsteps and Princess Mary entered with Natásha. Natásha

looking with a scared face at his comrade for help. The door, having let
“Here’s a cap, lads!” shouted a Preobrazhénsk soldier, donning a
soldier, mimicking the general who had ridden away. “I’d shoot them,

and suddenly two old women began spinning round on the carpet? Was that
“You’re half frozen, I’m sure! Bring some rum for tea!... Bonjour,
away. The Frenchman looked at the linen, considered for a moment, then
were lips seeking a kiss.
His horses and trap were sent home. Count Ilyá Rostóv, though not at


And when Belóva replied: “Oh yes, they’ve come,” she would mutter
all its detail the night at Bald Hills before he had the last stroke,
personage, a position in the army which seemed to him most attractive.

and so forth. They had heard all that before. And all he said—that it
votre victoire n’est pas des plus victorieuses.” *
science of history, whose aim is to enable nations and humanity to know
Prince Andrew went to visit him.

“There is nothing so refreshing after a sleepless night as a cup

sternly with a threatening and forbidding movement of her head.
fluttered, grew into harmonies, separated, blended, and again all
Sometimes on his way back from the anteroom he would pass through the
hand.
of delighted amazement.
“Oh, don’t speak of his going, don’t! I won’t hear it spoken
district postmaster who had obtained a post in Petersburg. Among the
equip him.”
presence. “Now listen,” she said to the count. “What do you want
empty and that the nurse had been hiding the dead baby. He drew the
Princess Mary went back to her room with the sad, scared expression that
some will always be found which by their meaning and their time of
by themselves, but merely gazed at her. Natásha lifted her frightened
“Run to the reserves and bring up the ammunition boxes!” he yelled,
horse, rode up to the porch, swung his leg over the saddle with a supple
had been happiest together, they suddenly had a feeling of estrangement
Partly because of the depressing memories associated with Bald Hills,
and letters which contain hints of such a line of action. But all these
gentlemen changed his position on seeing Borís. The one who was writing
And besides, the fate of the Fatherland did not depend on whether

entered Moscow till it was destroyed is like studying the dying leaps
the old prince. Princess Mary, too, went round to him.
perhaps because it was hard for him, hungry as he was, to look on at
that all was well.”
wont to dispose of all difficulties.

with pleasure. Morel, the orderly, brought some hot water in a saucepan
reproached and disputed with each other.
At that moment of emotional tenderness young Nicholas’ face, which
    CHAPTER XI

Natásha drew closer to him. Her face shone with rapturous joy.
had been hit—a large crowd had gathered near the second battalion.
action of every historic character has other more general purposes
sarcastically that the Commission had existed for a hundred and fifty


full Project Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with


“Go, go quickly,” the old man urged him.
stone, hundreds of riders composing the suites moved carelessly but
words he had found so difficult to utter: “I love you.” “It all
folded,” she concluded, convincing herself that the details she had just
     * “Oh, Mamma, don’t talk nonsense! You don’t understand

clouded with smoke, through which, high up, the sickle of the new moon
small cloud rose from the hill and was borne in a streak to the left by
the question, and historic investigation abundantly confirms it.
times in succession and march as if on parade. Fine fellows! Our King of
for the next battle are planned by him alone. Nominally he is only an

     * Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood.
when I say she’ll be a singer, a second Salomoni! We have engaged an
generally, Prince Andrew had, as he had had in Petersburg society, two
having convinced himself that he was asleep, took up a paper and in
at Krems excited but not weary, with dispatches from Dokhtúrov to
what he had acquired. Like a monkey which puts its paw into the narrow
the arm of Pierre whom he had promoted to be a Frenchman for saving his


seemed to members of the English Parliament that the cause of the war
yard.
the hollow the less they could see but the more they felt the nearness
ushering Bolkónski in. “So you’re a messenger of victory, eh?
on!”

combs, but no longer in their former state of purity. All is neglected
at Pierre’s fine though dirty linen and at the ring on his finger.
does not even attempt to hide its artificiality) of a man who is
flourishing his arm and saying something with a stern look. The
Prince Andrew listened to the account of the opening of the Council of
“Yes, I am, but please don’t let us do like that.... In another four

proclamation,” said the adjutant. “The young man is in prison and I
existence of such an incomprehensible Being, a Being all-powerful,
behind them, another fell in front and splashed Dólokhov with blood.
horses, and not a soul was to be seen there. In the great drawing
Madonna was depicted playing at stick and ball. The ball represented the
boys!...” but despite their united efforts the wattle hardly moved, and
Others joined those men and stopped and told how cannon balls had fallen
“You had better take care!” said the countess.
Princess Mary understood.


interests and his sincere contempt for all else, had acquired in his
how carefully and at what length everything relating to form and
her and for himself, and in a nervously emotional and softened mood he
French when they left Moscow had inevitably to perish because they
   Bring glory then to Alexander’s reign
candlesticks like those used in churches. Two of the brothers led Pierre
he called “Karabákh” though it was of Ukranian breed, and went up to it.
impending battle. All he had seen that day, all the significant and



was a very small one, it was a matter of great importance, for a man who
their ex-Elder.

“Forage has not been supplied to the extent...”
be confessed that Natalie is very susceptible.” This return to
“Karáy? Old fellow!...” wailed Nicholas.
the other. I looked round and saw Brother A. standing on the fence and
up and down the room, and smoke one pipe after another. He seemed
separated from the rest by a trench, everyone experienced a common and
Moscow, or of the roughness of their treatment by the French, or of the
Napoleon and about the uniforms they wore, and listened attentively to
speaking Russian, did not understand what was being said to him and
them all for a drive in his troyka, proposed to take with them about a

“It’s ancient history,” said another, guessing that it referred to

Davout glanced at him silently and plainly derived pleasure from the
“I think this used to be Natásha,” thought Nicholas, “and that
merely unthinkable to fight for ten hours and secure an indecisive
with you. May I?” he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the
of several authorities, their struggles and their falls, result solely
it is for you to talk or think of such matters. It is no easier for
a victory over Bonaparte, just when I’m not serving. Yes, yes, he’s
formerly to be with Pierre, and came to see him every day. To Pierre as
common sense and frank plainness of speech. Márya Dmítrievna was known

stern face as if wishing to make the visitor feel that the absence
an air of importance that showed that she felt she quite knew what she
De Beausset bowed gratefully at this regard for his taste for travel (of
military appointment in the army, their position gave them influence,
know in what capacity he was questioned by Bennigsen, the Grand Duke,
opened, a gentleman-in-waiting, bending respectfully, handed the Emperor
round and frowned. She was finishing her last prayer: “Can it be that
“General, I must obey orders, but I am not bound to endure...”
“Come to the mistress, please,” said the footman in his deep bass,
subsided within its shores and seemed to have become calm. But the
element of necessity and are less insistent on punishment for the crime,
Prince Andrew, who had thought it was all the same to him whether or


of the commander in chief’s special favor he was sent with the news of

The peasants in the crowd were similarly impressed when they saw
sit down! Sit down, Michael Ivánovich!”
and ecstasy such as he had never before known. Every trait and every
legs in their tight riding breeches, diffusing an odor of perfume, and
Count Tolstóy, who stood before him holding a silver salver on which lay

and the two Emperors were living with their suites, households, and

giving him some information, speaking in low tones as they all did.

purified, thou wilt gain wisdom. Look at your life, my dear sir.
crowd.


    * “What’s he singing about?”
“Well, and what are you going to do? Will you stay here if the enemy
When they began to blindfold him he himself adjusted the knot which

without going out of the house, waiting for the money his father could
CHAPTER IX
“And the count wanted him to say it was from Klyucharëv? I understand!”
“Oh, how nice,” thought Natásha; and when Sónya and Nicholas had

with you, my angel? Are you ill?” asked the count.
with Count Rostóv, the general, and the colonel. At the card table he
    CHAPTER XXI
“We couldn’t take Murat prisoner this morning or get to the place in
There was a momentary pause in the conversation; the old general cleared

shopman.

for five weeks, and then suddenly, with no fresh reason, fled back:
were seen, but columns of smoke rose on all sides, and all Moscow as far
not sent away with the other prisoners. Pétya had heard in the army many

toward her.
“Só-o-onya! Look here! How can you torture me and yourself like that,
answer to Pierre’s question, and smiled.
During the whole time of his convalescence in Orël Pierre had
There was a general movement as the princess, smiling and talking
after giving the letters to Sónya, went to Márya Dmítrievna who was
ready to put on speed when required.
constitution to Poland and forming the Holy Alliance as praiseworthy in


the holy relics, the gunpowder, munitions, and money, and had told the
without undressing, he generally remained awake thinking.
Prince Bagratión looked at Túshin, evidently reluctant to show
time of his activity utter one word inconsistent with the single aim
whole army, from its chiefs to the lowest soldier, without exception in
He wished to take a decision, but felt with dismay that in this matter
those conflicting opinions, were able to take a detached view of what

“Well?” asked Pierre, seeing his friend’s strange animation with

fields and forests of fir and birch, which were partly cut down. The
daughter seemed to say: “There, you see? You plotted against me, you
prepared, an officer was summoned and sent to deliver them to Ermólov
way Pierre was told of the death of his brother-in-law Anatole and of
    CHAPTER XII
pity for her and loathing for the thing he had to do, “whether it is
foam-flecked horses, shouted “Coming!” and Konovnítsyn rushed into the
Mikháylovna. Though the latter held on tenaciously, her voice lost none
attention to something within her that is only seen in pregnant women,
Vasíli’s house in the company of the stout princess, his wife, and
thinking without doing anything (which seemed to them incomprehensible),
this woman, who was so beautiful and so kind. Hélène for her part was

spoke of most ordinary things, yet she felt that they were closer to

of millions of Frenchmen submitting to the Bourbons. That Chateaubriand,

himself in the square he clearly heard the sound of bells and the joyous
Of his former bachelor acquaintances many were no longer in Petersburg.
“Sire! The Emperor, my master...” but the sight of the Emperor’s eyes
done and what was left had still to be packed, she found it dull.
“Here is the dispatch,” said Bolkhovítinov. “My orders are to give it at
a pretext for quitting the army.
not appeared when Alpátych sent for him; and that in the morning when

feel,” thought he, “if she saw me here now on this field with the
you would not deceive me? You’ll tell me the whole truth?”

understood nothing of the present, and all he saw and heard appeared to
return to Petersburg from abroad.
our present, depraved world. No one now loves virtue; it seems like

self-confident French; then again, like a man weary but unflinching in

“What am I to say to him?” thought Prince Andrew, looking down on the
had arranged to be free to pass himself off as a bachelor.

charming age when a girl is no longer a child, though the child is not
among themselves, tried to keep near the commander in chief (whose
bridges over the Niemen, deafened continually by incessant and rapturous
bright and happy eyes at her sister-in-law.
many people, some one of the opinions or wishes expressed is sure to be

The affianced couple, no longer alluding to trees that shed gloom and
by a mask of unconcern and ridicule of themselves, their situation, and
a kindhearted but unhappy man, and so people had been inclined to avoid
fear when her face is like that?” thought he, and placing himself before
and children.” The nobleman smote his breast. “We will all arise,
of 1812, has not experienced an uncomfortable feeling of regret,
groaning aloud and swinging his arm which had just been hurt, while
The wounded man was shown his amputated leg stained with clotted blood
After meeting Princess Mary, though the course of his life went on

command to the general next in seniority, Count Buxhöwden, having sent
except a few scattered skirmishers. An empty space of some seven hundred

escape that force, to address entreaties or exhortations to those who
her sister-in-law’s room. Prince Andrew in a traveling coat without
tell you!...” she almost screamed, so as to drown his voice.
like a pair of carriage horses, and began to overtake the hare, but
received, informed the count that an immense crowd had collected in the
almond-shaped eyes at the ground before her. Evidently she was aware
said Countess Mary. “He is such an exceptional boy. I am afraid I

Davout.
you know. He is a man who never forgets anything. Speak to the captain
When they had descended to the bridge Pétya and Dólokhov rode past the
The hussars crowded round and responded heartily with loud shouts.
of the French bivouac they were to attack next day.
beginning. But even had the aim of the Russians been to drive the French

taken off his eyes and, by the faint light of the burning spirit,
alive. How sorry I am that he died, and how glad I am that he is alive
the largest direct share in the event take on themselves the least

left him; but whether he was still alive, whether he was strong and
thinking of?” she went on, turning to Prince Hippolyte. “Fetch me my
representative but one of the great century, and that it is his own

“Why doesn’t the red-haired gunner run away as he is unarmed?

taken a ballroom in Bezúkhov’s house, and the ball, as everyone said,
“Not a patriot at all, but simply...” Natásha replied in an injured

Rostóv was very happy in the love they showed him; but the first
knew to be in power and whose aid he might need. In Petersburg he now

“You think so?” rejoined Anna Pávlovna in order to say something
recounting his military exploits (Prince Andrew could not endure
back from the Tambóv estate and told me they are already offering eighty
got back last night,” he said glancing at Natásha; “I want to have
looking at the ground, he came on some sticky, trodden mud, stumbled,
faculty to understand the essential points of the impending battle, but
noticed the look of terror with which Pierre regarded that lifeless arm,
can do nothing. I understand nothing. I have nobody! I want to go away
It was, in fact, only the commencement of the campaign that prevented
“I have already refused,” she said hurriedly.
in followed by a black one, and everything was in confusion; the borzois
and alien to himself—and had returned to his former peasant habits.
“Dear me! Mamma, Sónya, look, it’s he!”
equal halves on the palm of his hand, sprinkled some salt on it from the
Odýntsova had married an old man, and that there was a suitor for Mary,
re-establish order and relieve your condition. But to achieve this

The Emperor gave his consent. The aides-de-camp collected money by
the strength of the Russian army was trebled.
Shámshevo.”
bearing down on them from behind, and an unreasoning hurry and alarm
strike the keyboard with both hands.
wept too. They wept because they were friends, and because they were
can explain how the cruel Arakchéev, who tore out a grenadier’s mustache
standard in hand, I shall go forward and break whatever is in front of
Gerásim roused him from his reverie the idea occurred to him of taking
view—to lead the troops into action in the order prescribed by the


Natásha looked at him, and by way of answer to his words her eyes
“That’s it—not against it! You’ve filled your belly....”
to let him die on the road. “Would it not be better if the end did come,
but she was too excited to eat anything and kept wriggling about on her

that white spot. “I expect it’s snow... that spot... a spot—une

with long, light steps. He had a musketoon over his shoulder and an ax


same places. He nodded approval.
“Typhus, sir. It’s death to go in. Only we two, Makéev and I” (he
brought at once?”
Two footmen, the princess’ and his own, stood holding a shawl and
he glanced round at the pool from whence came sounds of shrieks and
a Polish count in the Vilkavisski forest.
away and was about to ask the countess again how to go to him, when
of the merriest music. Trap-ta-ta-tap! cracked the shots, now together,

“He had another stroke about half an hour ago. Courage, my



scanning the brilliant tiers of boxes opposite. A sensation she had not
When she saw the count, she stretched out her arms to him, embraced his
Prince Andrew bowed his head in token of having understood from the
When the pit had been filled up a command was given. Pierre was taken
Imperial aide-de-camp Wolzogen. He is said to be more Napoleon’s man
“But, just what did the genewal tell you? To weturn at once?” asked
then tidied up the things on the table and in his own corner, and,
souls, their eternal souls, for the attainment of benefits which endure
Prince Vasíli saw the princess off. She held a handkerchief to her eyes
remained, and this not by any fault of his own. He felt that it was not
one of Russia’s oldest generals would be captured or killed, and he
is incorrect and that the real course of the battle is better known to
working herself up to tears with the imaginary words of her pauvre mère
the princess’ part toward her future sister-in-law and a wish that
sternly.
Without waiting to hear him out, Prince Andrew asked:
Once in summer he had sent for the village elder from Boguchárovo, a
too, were flowers and grass, but it stood among them scowling, rigid,
were laws directing its movement and that of the other planets. There
nails. All the officers appeared to be, and really were, in love with
though now it was certainly not an expression of curiosity or gratitude,
does not acknowledge, but of those rare and always solitary individuals

started proving goodness knows what! A pity you were not there—what
the more I jest and the calmer I am the more tranquil and confident you

suddenly heard saying, and the general attention turned to the police
On the eighth of September an officer—a very important one judging by
games. The countess, when she had identified them and laughed at their

   Knows by experience, now, Bagratión,
“Yes, I belong to the Brotherhood of the Freemasons,” said the
had ruined his own happiness.


Nicholas’ career and am heartless and ungrateful, while truly... God

contingencies instead of two or three and based nothing on them. The
Dólokhov had composed for Anatole, and as she read it she found in it
left foot began convulsively tapping the horse’s side with the spur,
If it had depended on Napoleon’s will to fight or not to fight the
Pierre gave no answer, for he neither heard nor saw anything. He had
Platón, and at once resumed the story he had begun.

There was talk of his intrigues with some of the ladies, and he flirted

of which was occupied by Prince Andrew. The wounded man was much better
At two o’clock the six chosen guests assembled for dinner.

glasses of wine mechanically into his large mouth he felt a pleasant
turned away. Berg and his wife, who were not dancing, came up to them.
accompanied by his family. Three well-fed roans stood ready harnessed to
kissed Princess Mary’s hand. She did not know how she found the
end of his regiment’s encampment. Through a gap in the broken wall he
like a long-expected guest whose place was always ready awaiting him.

“Eh, you rascal!” Pierre heard the same kind voice saying at the other
to approximate, are significant from the fact that after seriously
Thus in the morning—especially if she had eaten anything rich the day

And the owner of the manly voice, evidently an infantry officer,
fist, and tapped it on the floor, making the sparks fly, while he

It seemed that all these men, now that they had stopped amid fields
And several of the men went over to the Fifth Company.

Anatole glanced at him and immediately thrust his hand into his pocket
The weather was already growing wintry and morning frosts congealed
restful in its hopelessness: that it was not for him to begin anything
members and guests jostling one another and trying to get a good look
“He’s a low fellow, say what you will,” remarked Prince Hippolyte.
society, more especially of the feminine society, in which I have had
CHAPTER XXII
moving the trunks, which were placed one on another, and was dragging
but not one fell close by, they all flew over. Alpátych was getting into
lovers of music do when they hear a false note. The two women let go

“Excuse my coming to you, cousin,” she said in a reproachful and
to fetch and another had hastily covered with a rug. An immense and
The prince tried to comfort her, but Hélène, as if quite distraught,
sight of these blue French dragoons pursuing our Uhlans. Nearer and
Prince Andrew opened his eyes and looked up at the speaker from the
just arrived, sat down on this bench. In the foremost place, immediately
but he did not explain to himself what these new relations were.
manages matters so that where there is a wealthy heiress there he is



manly thing to do. When the carriages had all passed in, the crowd,
the Shevárdino Redoubt was the left flank of our position, and the
sense in it for either the French or the Russians. Its immediate result
Sometimes it seemed to her that this difference arose from the
and never will depend, on position, or equipment, or even on numbers,
the trap would come for her too soon. After a casual pause, such as
she ought to behave like Mademoiselle Bourienne, but could not.
He was himself carried away by the tone of magnanimity he intended to
was supported in his design and prevented from renouncing it by what he
And I’ve had a bit cut off, you see...” he went on with a smile,
and his back drawn in, slightly swinging one foot, and, with his head a
with terror. The thought that both her sons were at the war, had both
It was Kutúzov, who had been riding round the position and on his way

were using their ramrods, others putting powder on the touchpans or
grasp their meaning. He could not disavow his actions, belauded as they
it seemed to him that either he had told the coachman this or that the
the countess, but Natásha, who had bustled about helping them all, was
prisoners if they agree to be captured, just as it is only possible
After the Austerlitz campaign Prince Andrew had firmly resolved not
He told of his adventures as he had never yet recalled them. He now, as

answered the general.
their commander in chief.

be punished as he deserves,” said he with the vindictive heat with which
that could happen. They went away even before the battle of Borodinó and
submissively folded before him his thin hands, unused to work.
Bogdánovna.
were, “high-sounding words which have long been discredited. Who does
from the commune.
“I should think not,” said Véra, “because there can never be
burnt his boats, and I believe that we are ready to burn ours.”

“And I have known so many cases of a splinter wound” (the Gazette said
definitely decided on, Denísov turned his horse and rode back.

considering what the gratification of his tastes entailed for others,
events, and that a Napoleon’s influence on the course of these events is
not at all what Count Bennigsen intended. He meant to fortify that knoll
from a man’s head.”
a regiment would ruin him. Pierre listened to him, scarcely able to
girlish adoration that her smile could not for a single instant impose

of a sack, dashed gaily across the brook toward the camp.
Friant’s division.”
thought and said what men who have no convictions but wish to seem to
feet and hammered him with his fists. Shouts of approval were heard
The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingness to
“Life is everything. Life is God. Everything changes and moves and that
like a wail, first one hound, then another, and then another, sprang
come to an upland of his about a mile away which he usually kept for


I am very, very sorry for her,” he concluded, and was pleased to notice
mustache he had grown, moving his fingers slowly. His eyes gazed at them
Pierre, with downcast eyes, drank out of his glass without looking at
way,” said an officer.
reinforce the right flank. The officer of the suite ventured to remark


There was not a trace of agitation on his face. With delicate irony he

day before. A crowd of military men was assembled there, members of the
of sons and brothers.
“Ah, my dear friend! Forget the wrongs that may have been done you.


Bavarians, Württembergers, Mecklenburgers, Spaniards, Italians, and
“If he is better, ask Pierre to dine with us. He has been to the



I expect the Minister (Barclay de Tolly) has already reported the

the same coquettish, self-satisfied girl, enjoying every moment of her
After a while the moving mass became agitated, someone rode past on
“You’re also waiting for the commander in chief?” said he. “They say he
“Thank God!” said Sónya, crossing herself. “But perhaps she
pale and ill. He had been feverish for two days and was now shivering
“Well, that’s only till the first engagement.”
cases only one goes wrong, but it is her fancy and mine. They have been
the French stationed at Tarútino; the news of easy successes gained by
days of their retreat, of Karatáev’s illness and his death.
out of the room.
decidedly lost bearings, you know that a letter was received from him
to you since dinner? Hasn’t she?”
obedience—which did not even seem to him a virtue, but a joy. (He now
from the folds of her frock.
to speak so. God will punish you,” she said admonishingly, turning to

give a ruble to anyone who found a hare.
conversation in French.
pipe firmly with the other. Panting and puffing, the major grumbled and
“No, Prince, our regiment has gone to the front, but I am attached...
be denied that he was a painstaking and brave officer, on excellent
PROCLAMATION
obtained his leave. His hussar comrades—not only those of his own

days with her, asked her to sleep in her room, and often talked with her
accompany him to the army in Moldavia, to which the old general had
the village, but it was not of them she was thinking. She felt that she
several looters. But of all these various suspected characters, Pierre
hatred for the French in words proved insufficient, when it was not
Princess Mary’s face.
on thinking, or hearing, in his dream) is to be able in your soul to
“Before me? No! All is over for me,” she replied with shame and
Kutúzov, shrugging his shoulders, replied with his subtle penetrating
“It is the sword of Frederick the Great which I...” she began, but


Speaking of the position of Prussia, Anna Pávlovna very naturally asked
falsehood of it repulsed him and blocked every path of activity. Yet he
Bending forward in his armchair he said: “Le Roi de Prusse!” and
     of receipt of the work.
don’t need it? Now you shall judge between us. I always tell him: Here
“I am sure you’re not telling us everything; I am sure you did
till he began sincerely to believe in his own exceptional kindness and
“As you please... really... I think so... but as you please,” said
“Of course not!”
“A nice little hot torch for the infantry! Good luck to you, fellow
shirts for them.
thought about their next pay, their next quarters, of Matrëshka the
reached Bagratión, the weighty tread of the mass of men marching in

to give by the clock, the warm drinks, the chicken cutlets, and all the
conversation, they heard the sound of slippered feet rapidly

newly emerging opinion and for this object would produce arguments more
sorrow or sighing, but eternal joy and bliss.
him to me!”
tried to excuse Pierre and suggested reasons for his delay in returning.
followed behind, talking and shouting.
BOOK TWO: 1805
some reason she called it Urope as if that were a specially refined
Pierre glanced into the pit and saw that the factory lad was lying with
speaking to him about Lise as if she were alive—he had forgotten she
a frightened and suffering look resembling that on the thin Frenchman’s
from the field of battle with the pale and terrified Ober-Hofmarschal
his gray hair.


present circumstances something else is needed.”
“My mind, my mind aches?” questioned Princess Mary.
“Hand it in. It seems...”
that was unanswerable. It was more than true.

regardless of her grief-stricken face joked with her. But when he had
cartloads he sold for the prince, nor a single shock of the whole corn
An undefined instinct told Pierre that these explanations, and
twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth were not completed, and secondly, by the
and bewilderment. In contrast to his former reticent taciturnity
held sacred, and therefore would not hear of refusing and accepted the
movement of Dólokhov’s hands. Those broad, reddish hands, with hairy
Markóv immediately dropped his own beside it and picked it up without

fair-haired lad in a clean blue coat, was standing over the others. His
first time all the cruelty of his rejection of her, the cruelty of his
princesses Aline and Sophie sit whole days with me, and we, unhappy

himself one with his horse, rode past the Emperor with a frowning but

“I am.”
daughter’s happiness.
Prince Andrew smiled as he looked at his sister, as we smile at those we
had become more intimate when Prince Andrew was in Vienna with Kutúzov.
come.... But I’m sorry to leave you.”

and with a bow to them both he went out.
“Uncle” sat listening, slightly smiling, with his head on one side.
At the review next day the Emperor asked Prince Andrew where he would
Andrew.
     fellow!”

Pierre had already long been feeling in himself that refreshing source
authors, reformers, popes, and journalists, to the extent to which in

spiritual tranquility on the one side made it the more possible for her


to cause you annoyance if only you will allow me to act as your escort.”
At the very instant he did this and uttered those words, Pierre felt
The servant handed him a book which Pierre took to be a devotional work,
For some time he stood in silence considering whether he should follow
“I don’t understand,” he said, “how it is that the mind of man
and prolonged part in the defense of his country, but did so casually,
to slip in over there.”
hand, was clearing manure from the cowhouse, looked out, and his face
“Ah, but you won’t talk politics to me like Annette!”
quick-witted, nor ready or eloquent in conversation, but he had the
a minimum of effort and insignificant losses, despite the greatest
This longing to distinguish themselves, to maneuver, to overthrow, and
heard curses on Bonaparte, “the enemy of mankind.” Militiamen and

them again, but the salons of Anna Pávlovna and Hélène remained just
house on the Sívtsev Vrazhók.
Oldenburg wronged. We cannot grasp what connection such circumstances
“I have the pleasure of being already acquainted, if the countess
explanations, however clear they might be. Whether it was the
been dug. Within the entrenchment stood ten guns that were being fired


which she neither wished, nor could, nor considered it necessary, to

“That’s twue, devil take it!” shouted Denísov, jumping up. “Now
squadron. All were looking at the enemy in front and at the squadron
away with a grimace as if to say that everything Dólokhov had said to
delight would find in his wife’s ideas and actions the very thought
“It’s nothing, nothing; leave me alone!” sobbed Sónya.
and officers advanced to the gate. In the gateway lay three wounded and
first pair of gloves, a man’s, he said that Pierre could not know
the host’s father and mother, and of himself in military uniform. The
A little behind the hussars came Denísov, accompanied by two infantry
with the greatest pleasure—which he did not conceal and which his
there she would have perished at the hands of the mutineers and of the
for no one believed it to be possible; it resulted from a most complex
overflowing with despair, shame, and humiliation, and that it was not
same way in his own soul.

that remained uninjured out of the four, they began moving down the hill


was already at the door. Princess Mary saw him walk out of the house in
reality, like the retreat from Filí, it did not suggest itself to anyone
    CHAPTER XVIII
always sitting in the same attitude.
“Is it possible?” exclaimed Anna Mikháylovna. “Oh, how awful!
thought could not occur to the doctors (as it cannot occur to a wizard

“Yes, I was,” Pierre answered. “There will be another battle
The crowd, pushing forward desperately, squeezed together, moved a few
honorable, of Bezúkhov? And Fédya, with his noble spirit, loved him

were ready to drop, and so said the grown-up young men and women who
course of the Kolochá and Moskvá rivers—was broken and hilly. Between
at the sky to which Pierre had pointed, and for the first time since
“Onterkoff,” said the captain and looked at Pierre for some seconds with
conclusion by another road, that is, to recognize (1) nations guided
one of them, in the lists of killed, wounded, and rewarded, the name of
people are tortured, enlightenment is suppressed. All that is young and

Heavy night dews alone refreshed the earth. The unreaped corn was
courage, but she looked straight into his handsome face as it came near

herself recalling to the minutest detail every word, every gesture, and
my dear, whether the will and letter were written, and whether they have
jingling sound it presented arms. Then amidst a dead silence the
elated. He had noticed a solitary tree ahead of him. This tree had been





When Prince Andrew left the palace he felt that all the interest

expressions with the choicest French phrases—which was a peculiarity
same way as the day before, yet she was quite different. Had she been
everybody, and you and I understand it all,” and much, much more was
they gave her an attraction more powerful than that of beauty. But the
“I am not doing this on my own account,” she continued, “I do it in the


commanding officer. The young officer, his hand to his shako, ran up to
“Besides how can I ask the Emperor for his instructions for the right
had mastered him as at something strange, apart from and independent of
then the aide-de-camp who had opened the ball, and several other young
considered it his duty to inform his Friend and Brother that Rostopchín
As the sun and each atom of ether is a sphere complete in itself, and


And Karatáev, with a suddenly changed and saddened expression, took
once she has said...”
and thence again beyond Drissa, drawing near to the frontier of Russia
own house; now wrote a proclamation to the French solemnly upbraiding
The Frenchman glanced around uneasily and then, as if overcoming his
moaning of the adjutant’s? Yes, he was altogether like that. In her
regarded the whole business of the war not with his intelligence or his
fool!” said Denísov severely.
give this order in my brother’s name; and tell them that what is ours is

time and does not condescend to prepare what he has to say but is sure

Hélène welcomed Natásha delightedly and was loud in admiration of her

gentlemen. Pierre, who had come downstairs, walked through the rooms and
not many left alive. Go that way, to that village, all the commanders


“And me, kiss me!”

the brilliant surroundings in which he had last met his friend in

extraordinarily disdainful composure with which Speránski answered
cold tone and supposing that it was due to the condition of his


conqueror? Was the will of the Confederation of the Rhine transferred
thread. A third with pins in her mouth was running about between the

rite which everyone expected of him, and that he was therefore bound
refreshed by inhaling the aromatic autumn air, when even the nights
nothing to him.... “I should perhaps have done the same thing in his

Every muscle of Telyánin’s pale, terrified face began to quiver, his
One day in Moscow in Princess Mary’s presence (she thought her father


“All take glasses; you too, Balagá. Well, comrades and friends of my
Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number
He sent for Pierre and said to him: “My dear fellow, if you are going

deeply. Only after emptying a bottle or two did he feel dimly that the
abreast.
the lines and an adjutant ran to look for the missing officer.
something cracked, shouts were heard, and the troyka flew along the
long before Borís’ departure she formed a definite plan of action.

would be regarded by the secular authorities.
chickens.
wrote down his own name in French, Comte Pierre Besouhoff, but the
During the whole week she spent in this way, that feeling grew every
began.
Pávlovna, looking up pensively.

in good spirits, he mounted his horse and rode out into the field
have nothing to complain of.”
“All right, all right!” said Dólokhov. But Pétya did not let go of him
CHAPTER IV
Napoleon was already not far from Kutúzov on the old Kalúga road.
“Well, till we meet again...” he said, holding out his hand to
be disgraced,” thought she.
Yet to supply this conception various historians take forces of

sergeant was an impostor, that he had lied, and that the whole Russian
And is it worth tormenting oneself, when one has only a moment of life
country and the Tsar confer honors upon him, what does that matter? She
thoughts came to him in bed. So he called Tíkhon and went through the


Bosse. Have him fetched.”
general who signed that capitulation had no right to do so, and that no
what he intended to accomplish or had accomplished; in general he

detected sympathy and a desire to conceal that sympathy.
“Back or forward? Eh, no matter, forward...” the wolf seemed to say
was not done, because Poniatowski, advancing on the village through the
that all Europe is powerless before him.... And I don’t believe a
group was destroyed, as well as the old habits and traditions, and step
what he was about; yet they beat him à plate couture,*(3) and where

miss any chance to do something really heroic. He was highly delighted
crouched feet and all in the corner of her sofa, nervously crumpling and
personally Nicholas could not wish for a better wife: by marrying her

“Drónushka,” she said, regarding as a sure friend this Drónushka who
their name and my own I hold out a brotherly hand to you.”
Pierre suddenly flushed crimson and for a long time tried not to look
burst into convulsively painful sobs that distorted his soft round face.
did not adapt himself mentally to this new position of affairs.
“Yes, these verses Nicholas wrote himself and I copied some others,
misdirected will, and that the very ideas of 1789 were arrested in their

for the most part handsome fellows and, as is always the case in an
to himself. Karatáev had no attachments, friendships, or love, as Pierre
such and such favorites and such and such mistresses. Moreover, certain


“You see, he holds it up.” (She meant the baby’s head.) “But how he did

from laughing.
pregnancies, and this was such a time.
Eternal and Unfathomable, whose presence above the dying man was now so
unfinished entrenchments, but the disadvantage of that position was
Stein, a former Prussian minister; Armfeldt, a Swedish general; Pfuel,

red-spotted bitch on Ilágin’s leash, slender but with muscles like
artillery should be placed.
outside the hospital. He seemed to try to forget that old life and

As soon as Prince Andrew had given up his daily occupations, and

a short pause. “Besides, would the princess have me? And besides, she is

He looked straight at Prince Andrew and suddenly unwrinkled his
officers were whispering together. Dólokhov was a long time mounting
squeezed together, sat women with rouged faces, dressed in glaring
The housekeeper, the old nurse, the cooks, coachmen, maids, footmen,
away. What am I to do? Write to Kurágin demanding an explanation? But
always clear and simple, so she is not stupid. She never was abashed and
added quickly.

marriage. When the count was already leaving the room, Princess Mary

not tell you, but you have been treating her badly. What a heart she
“I remember,” answered Nicholas. “I remember that I came to you
and arguments proves to him that the complete freedom of which he is
the muddy, slippery road, looking at his feet and at the roughness of
trusts to luck, one should make certain,’ and I want to try.”
occasionally plucking leaves from a branch that met his hand, sometimes
happiness, that happiness is within him, in the satisfaction of simple


destination, halted, piled arms, and settled down on the cold ground,
characters and nations.
change that had come over her since the ball. She was silent, and not
own and promptly contribute their own clever comments prepared in their
yesterday when I ordered Plátov to retreat, or was it the evening
and the hall, footmen were bustling about with wine and viands. Groups

Her voice trembled, and she again nearly cried, but recovered and went
dying of fright. I did, ‘pon my word, I got that frightened!” said
he passed it. Pierre began to feel a sense of uneasiness, and the
The squadron in which Rostóv was serving had scarcely time to mount
only less pretty than at the ball, but only redeemed from plainness by
ground floor, and clapping Pierre on the shoulder ran with him into the
with that maniac’s bullet in my body?”
no one would understand that it was not to quench his thirst or from

The French had attacked the battery and, seeing Kutúzov, were firing
“Hurrah-ah-ah!” reverberated in the forest, and the Cossack companies,

The French, not being farther pursued, began to recover themselves: they
deep sigh:

some undefined force called an idea—history’s essential question still


could be discerned.
radiantly on her beautiful face. Pierre gazed at her with rapturous,
“Inform the prince that labor has begun,” said Mary Bogdánovna,
“Charge!” shouted by an officer who was urging his thoroughbred to

the serfs’ quarters.
Quos vult perdere dementat. *
by the screaming children the mummers, covering their faces and

“It is not at all what you suppose; but that is what the German
theory by a huge experiment and proving its soundness to the whole world
bare chest. He was conducted from that room along passages that turned
cushion at which Princess Mary was looking. The flow of her thoughts
Besides the Bezúkhov family, Nicholas’ old friend the retired General
which seemed to rise out of the sea of mist and on which the Russian

huntsman. One crossed himself continually, the other scratched his back
hoping to find him alone. When he came in and saw an hussar of the line
Before Belliard was out of sight, a messenger from another part of the
“But you don’t suppose I’m going to get you married at once? There is
Petersburg as a buffoon, and so of what she had said they only noticed,
smile of a doctor to whom an old wife wishes to explain the treatment of
Timókhin, armed only with a sword, had rushed at the enemy with such
and looked at her in such a way that not only could she not bear his
“Oh, you damned dandies! Clean and fresh as if you’d been to a fete,
Just then at a distance behind Kutúzov was heard the sound of regiments
the conquerors, nor even in armies and battles, but in something else.
only serve to exalt him—and though he himself has no plan, he is quite


whom now the blood rushed to his heart and he felt a difficulty in
crowd.
Only when Bennigsen had entered the hut did Kutúzov leave his corner and

insane—unprofitable to himself, to the count, and to the serfs—made
a Russian bath; do you understand? Out of a moral bath. Isn’t it true?”
as he rode by.
meaning of the feminine whispering behind the door, and a desire to
read any papers, I made it up myself.’ ‘If that’s so, you’re a traitor


plainly that that was the result of Napoleon’s will. Speaking so, the

in front he caught glimpses of an open space with a strip of red cloth
reactions? To these questions there are and can be no answers. Equally
immediately jumped aside in terror. The wolf crouched, gnashed her

drug, and had died in agony before assistance could be rendered her.

authors, we ought to be shown the connection existing between these men
it was just this peculiarity of Speránski’s mind that particularly
he asked involuntarily, though only to himself. “Oh, yes, long ago

here,” came the voice of an hussar, past whom Rostóv was riding in
were all a pretense, and that the whole attention of that company was

Moscow for his equipment, was to join them on the march to Radzivílov.

bracelets, plumes, necklaces, and gold embroidery, who was galloping
doing justice to our feelings, we forget him.”
closed and was covered just with a pink quilt, and that his hands were

are young and I am old. I should like to help you as far as lies in my
Andrew. “Look here, my dear fellow, get from Kozlóvski all the

whereabouts. First he rings his bell fearlessly, but when he gets into
who had grown old in society and at court. He went up to Anna Pávlovna,
had uttered them.
fast as the horses could draw it, but for a long time Count Rostopchín
it. But on the eighth of August a committee, consisting of Field Marshal
This letter had not yet been presented to the Emperor when Barclay, one
incapacity already in 1807.”
saw the cupolas and crosses of the New Convent of the Virgin still dark
entertaining supposition.
that had concealed them and, separating, flowed on and on by the three
Russia, say to our being so frightened, and why are we abandoning our
Natásha stopped abruptly.
not available. Besides, as a result of the frequent and rapid change of
me.”
war was the Continental System which was ruining Europe; to the generals

arm wavered still more with the strain. One hand moved as if to clutch
of the sheds, and animated French talk mingled with curses sounded all
Princess Mary, in her position as absolute and independent arbiter of

anyone who wanted to see him could come the hundred miles from Moscow to

After this, three pages were left blank in the diary, and then the
and unheard-of rapidity toward the goal they had fixed on. Besides the
import of what was taking place lay in the personal struggle between
soldiers and officers of various regiments, they saw on their left some
by her husband, Mortemart, the delightful Prince Hippolyte who had
wagons, and crowds of orderlies and sentinels. The commander in chief

gone, so why,’ she says, ‘don’t we go?’ And he began beating and pulling


“How she loves me!” thought Princess Mary. “How happy I am now,

“Lovely, lovely! Go on, Uncle, go on!” shouted Natásha as soon as
customary routine. To such customary routine belonged his conversations
“On the contrary,” he said, in a querulous and angry tone that
wife, was talking in low tones to the elderly lady about Pierre.
the last part. In particular, the words “I will come back to dinner,”
Two more prisoners were led up. In the same way and with similar looks,
Karatáev’s face as he told it, and the mystic significance of that joy.
expected back every minute.

bursting into tears.
she ordered the butler who was handing things round. “That’s not
luminous eyes fixed on her nurse’s wrinkled face (every line of which
“Ha, ha, ha!” The Frenchman emitted a merry, sanguine chuckle, patting


headlong, crushing one another, but had afterwards reassembled and
final instructions, orders, and commissions to the baggage men

realized his danger, laid back his ears and rushed off headlong. He had
woman. Now I have spoken that terrible word to myself all has become
had not gone away.
“That is metempsychosis,” said Sónya, who had always learned well,

“You have a try, Hercules,” said he, turning to Pierre.
were observed and the Emperor was the first to set that example,
to him was solely due to Napoleon.
retreating to our frontier—which do today.’
While Prince Andrew went to report about the purple-faced general, that

to rotate on one spot. The historical figures at the head of armies,
“However, if you command it, Your Majesty,” said Kutúzov, lifting
particularly striking among all these drunken voices by its sober


Nicholas with a smile. “You and I haven’t seen anything of one another
     * “Think it over; get into the barque, and take care not to
sister, Catiche, with a vicious and determined look steadily fixed on
captured from the French beside which horses were tethered, that under
or to die. There is no other way for me,” the letter began. Then he
fellows? The last one was hardly twenty.”

     * And all that follows therefrom.
bare hand as red as his face.
“I’m sorry, sorry for that fine fellow. Give me the letter.”
that Dron had finally given up the keys and joined the peasants and had
it’s splendid. I am very glad to have made your acquaintance. It’s

“Vasíli Dmítrich, I thank you for the honor,” she said, with an

left the place where the balls and bullets were flying about, their
Russia. It was said that the Emperor was leaving the army because it was

had been taken out everywhere, and though she was certainly good-looking

Had the Cossacks pursued the French, without heeding what was behind and
concealed from Natásha. Natásha guessed they were talking about the

Andrew, trying to extenuate his action so as not to irritate the old man
Andrew. “Let others—the young—yield afresh to that fraud, but we
Entering the house, Prince Andrew saw Nesvítski and another adjutant
“Whatever is this? This!” he shouted and stood still. “Commander
Through the smoke, as he approached the gate, Pétya saw Dólokhov, whose

As soon as it rose everyone in the boxes and stalls became silent, and
houses in Povarskáya Street. Natásha was evidently pleased to be dealing
Just as Borís’ leave of absence was expiring, Anatole Kurágin made
The Horse Guards were galloping, but still holding in their horses.
“O God, O God! What does it mean?” she suddenly exclaimed. “To bed
“Eh? Really... what do you think? Should we let them go on or not?”

reopened in the warm climate, which obliged him to defer his return till
merry.
to think of the interview with his dying father which awaited him. He
“I don’t like those fashionable churches,” she said, evidently
“Not yet!” interposed Napoleon, and, as if fearing to give vent to his
of assurance and haste, Pierre concluded that it was all absolutely

a happiness he had long forgotten and of which he had not even been
telling it all to Natásha he experienced that pleasure which a man has

free, so lighthearted! And I did not realize how happy I was! When did

thought Prince Andrew, and striking his horse he rode up to Kutúzov.
me!” Rostóv whispered.
you, dear Mary, that in spite of his extreme youth his departure for
them or make them move. On the one hand, the chief steward put the state

room, when Rostóv was shown in. She could not grasp who he was and why
was the count at last handed a letter addressed in his son’s
the reports most flattering to our army were circulated. In the French
bear the whole burden on his shoulders. Fancy what he had to go through!
They shut the door and all sat down.

made him neglect the game.


    La mort est secourable et la mort est tranquille.
swarmed with well-provisioned sutlers and Austrian Jews offering
part in the activity to devise considerations, justifications, and
A B C of war or of politics, and that Bonaparte was an insignificant
“The Gospels. I haven’t one.”
The writers of universal histories and of the history of culture are
promised not to forget him, distinguished him above the other adjutants,
Princess Mary begged him to stay one day more, saying that she knew how


What a delightful boy he was!”
same kind of lamentation was heard from other parts of the street.

in as far as that was in his power.
a long-awaited moment. He was firmly convinced that this was the day of
Meadow.”
    CHAPTER XVI
French prisoners captured that day (there were seven thousand of them)
“Eh, mounseer, Russian sauce seems to be sour to a Frenchman... sets his
Convention, to the Directory, to Napoleon, to Alexander, to Louis XVIII,
“Countess, I have done w’ong,” Denísov went on in an unsteady
“General Kutúzov,” said Bolkónski, speaking French and stressing

all nonsense.... I said then that it was not in order,” voices were
FIRST EPILOGUE: 1813 - 20
shifting events and so he never can at any moment consider the whole
“I wished to get a nap, mon cousin, but I can’t.”
He divided the Brothers he knew into four categories. In the first he
Their sabers catching in the bridles and their spurs jingling, the
moral support, and the same sense of being at home here in his own
and resignation to the will of God. “If you do not understand these
before. He is a second autocrat,” he concluded with a victorious smile.
the accuracy of his theory.

he would not make peace so long as a single armed Frenchman remained on

his third bowl. All the young soldiers smiled gaily as they watched him.

that he would go away without having sold his three roans to the Polish
select a place for the crossing.
of separate states to the writers of general histories and the new
He shrugged his shoulders. A footman conducted Borís down one flight of
brother’s and sister’s laughter (it could never enter his head that
through Medýn and Yukhnóv, but the one thing he could not foresee was
agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached
agreeable to us, and I accept your offer. I am glad. And my husband... I
the living charm of her neck and shoulders, so near to his lips that
battle.
high—I always said....”

appointed two commissaries general, or chiefs of police, and twenty
“There! I said if only we waited—and so it was!” was being joyfully said
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days

beaming with a more than cordial smile.

ever since the battle of Borodinó, for all the generals who came to

attacked the Russians while they were marching beyond the Pakhrá? What
them, when suddenly, clinking his spurs and spreading out his legs,
better not buzz about here till you get hurt. Be off! Go!” he shouted
gives expression to the essence of freedom.
went into the reception room familiar to Pierre, with two Italian
There was still no improvement in the countess’ health, but it was
delivering his message, awaiting permission to withdraw. Napoleon,
Dessalles dropped his eyes.
horses, so that though everything has been packed up since morning, her
love and befriend him.”
military service, though he knew that sooner or later he would have to
saw for the first time peasant militiamen in their white shirts and with

given away for nothing.
bosom, saying: “Now you are all mine, mine! You won’t escape!”—from that

auction for half its value, and half the debts still remained
the battlefield.
of the terrible strain, put on speed close to the hare, knocked it off
listened at the door, and it seemed to her that his mutterings were
“Zakhár is shouting that I should turn to the left, but why to the
“Wait a bit, here’s a letter for you,” said the old man suddenly,
Kutúzov felt and knew—not by reasoning or science but with the whole of

he applied himself to business with zeal and perseverance and surprised
reproached her in his heart and tried to despise her, but he now felt so
All this, like the other parts of the disposition, was not and could
brotherly tenderness, almost lover-like.
or was stopped, at the point beyond which his criticism might touch the
After talking for some time with the esaul about next day’s attack,
“No. Give me the book,” said the stranger.
the Shevárdino Redoubt as the left flank of the position. It was much
frightened. “I believe the whole of Moscow will burn, there’s an awful
Balagá was about to leave the room.

Freemasonry and not as Prince B. or Iván Vasílevich D., whom he knew
saying that the Russian ladies are not equal to the French? One has to
in a normal state in that respect. All the powers of his mind were more
eagerly and rather disdainfully, not resting on anything although his
The first shots had not yet ceased to reverberate before others rang out
CHAPTER II
The first words he heard on coming to his senses were those of a French
CHAPTER VIII
another, crowding, panting, and pushing, scrambled the soldiers and

smile,” says Thiers. After riding a few paces in silence, Napoleon
who were, it seemed, obliged to live in the count’s house. Such were
    CHAPTER IV
“Devil take it!” said the voice of a man stumbling over something.
in 1805, and who saw in him not only all the virtues but all human
were a mob of marauders, each carrying a quantity of articles which
that something had gone wrong during his absence, but it was so terrible
CHAPTER VII
days and nights with a Wallachian woman—Prince Andrew asked Kutúzov
“He has been set down. He died,” replied someone.
smiling.
must go away too, take away what you can and tell the serfs to go to the
Pierre.
which she spoke of her exalted patroness, supported Hélène’s wish.
this bone—a bill for thirty thousand rubles—to the poor princess
the chair for her.
and scorn of everything that is only seen in huntsmen. He doffed his
Before five in the evening the battle had been lost at all points. More

with a strength he had never before felt, he made a step toward her
“That’s the way,” said Dólokhov, “and then so!” and he turned the collar
tell everything just as it happened, but imperceptibly, involuntarily,
Your Majesty has considered yourself to be in a state of war with me
them appropriated several houses, chalked their names on them, and
summer to see one of her sons, allowed herself plainly to express
always sacrifice my feelings for my family’s welfare,” he said to
teeth, and again rose and bounded forward, followed at the distance of a
Then suddenly he realized the joyful significance of that wail; tears
got up and said something to the ladies. Anna Mikháylovna stepped
regularly and quietly. It was evidently not so much his sufferings that
it. Come on!... They’ll take the cubs from under your very nose.”
“Papa, he is a blackguard and a thief! I know he is! And what I have
without some shouting and even a little fighting among themselves—and it

“If all Russians are in the least like you, it is sacrilege to fight
disillusionment? Pierre was the only person to whom he made up his mind
concentrate. “There we shall encounter difficulties, and there,”
townsfolk to turn into the yards and to draw up at the entrances of the


fought.
Why was the Russian army—which with inferior forces had withstood the
knoll, and their guns boomed incessantly along their line and sent

“No really, my dear, this dress is not pretty,” said Lise, looking
Natásha and Pierre were living in Petersburg at the time and had no
to extend his line, but he welcomed every step forward as a triumph and

of the movement of humanity, the historians study the men of whom the
her.” And he vividly pictured to himself Natásha, not as he had done in
studying the events from the letters of the sovereigns and the generals,
Pierre glanced round at the first cloud, which he had seen as a round

son happy.” Princess Mary went on to ask Natásha to fix a time when
herself on it, sobbing so violently that she could not stop for a long
His passion for the Emperor had cooled somewhat in Moscow. But still, as
playing out a whole suit and to his partner’s delight taking five
deep. As soon as day dawned the march began. The artillery and baggage
remarked:
“Well, is it true that it’s peace and capitulation?” asked
that it was impossible to stop them, spurred his horse and rode to the
estate near Moscow, and to receive many people who formerly did not
her grief and gave her strength.
motionless brilliance.
“What... what they have brought us to!” Kutúzov suddenly cried in an
Pierre interrupted him.
The orders were not to let them in. So we’re in force, it seems....
The soldiers shook their heads disapprovingly as they looked at Pierre.
does not quite see it; more particularly as it is he and his corps who
side by side. Prince Vasíli was not having any supper: he went round

“You’re a gentleman, aren’t you?”
not known that he was dying, how could he have failed to pity her and
love for her. Apart from this insuperable antipathy to her, Princess
most brilliant young men, whom he evidently dominated.
Anatole was smilingly talking to a partner on his arm and looked at

them from the other end of the corridor, Strauch, an Austrian general
evident that he not only knew everyone in the drawing room, but had
troops on this and that side in a certain known locality, and begin our
“No one can attain to truth by himself. Only by laying stone on stone
waiting for a seven to turn up, gazed at Dólokhov’s hands which held


like a schoolboy in a hurry to run out to play, blundered in his talk
“There is in Moscow a lady, une dame, and she is very stingy. She must
Coming out of Kutúzov’s room into the waiting room with the papers in
in the soldiers’ ward, and still seeming to see fixed on him those
     reflections on the unsatisfactory results of the battles at

Nicholas—“into an old maid like yourself! A pity! Prince Andrew

pitiful plight, would be on a lower level to claim a share in the

smaller unit as the subject of observation—as criticism has every
dog could eat all it wanted.
the Russians aimed at.
following the princess, whom a footman was helping into the carriage.
strength removed and transferred to the Emperor. Toll, Konovnítsyn, and
credit! And the people too are quite mutinous—they no longer obey,
live in society.

throughout an army one and the same temper, known as “the spirit of
I should be ashamed to do it, and suddenly everything vanished. And I
words—that a true Freemason should be a zealous worker for the state
that was not pretty, but neither Mademoiselle Bourienne nor the little
pride enough to see it? If she has no pride for herself she might at
be gentle and kind to his cousin. She thoroughly realized the wrong he
and a plan. These he put down beside him—not letting anyone read them at
blushing and looking anxiously at the officers to see if they appeared
was expected in Moscow, where old Prince Bolkónski was spending the
CHAPTER IX
the whole meaning of a song lies in the words and that the tune comes
right have we to argue? We cannot comprehend either the Emperor’s aims
affording him a special kind of pleasure and a consciousness of

to one side he gracefully held a gold lorgnette to his eyes and looked
before the battle, the figure of the insignificant little Napoleon, and
body already. Here is one I got at Wagram” (he touched his side) “and a
“An order to who?” asked the colonel morosely.
less than ever. By the Emperor’s orders Bagratión reported direct to

neighboring town, who had been at Bald Hills for the last fortnight.)
the command of the army to General Buxhöwden. During this interregnum
He sat in his short overcoat leaning against a birch tree. On his face,



theorist, self-confident to the point of despising everyone else) was

loan of a petticoat to be used as a curtain, and behind that screen
destroyed that dreadful barrier which—in the absence of such love—stands
turned on the subject Nicholas liked best—recollections of 1812. Denísov
The Frenchman’s chatter which had previously amused Pierre now repelled
(the liberal attempts at the beginning of his reign, his struggle with

candle he sat up in bed, then got up, then lay down again not at all

“They were there this evening, but now I don’t know, your
himself in the palace at Potsdam.



Natásha, the young Melyukóvs’ favorite, disappeared with them into
Davout raised his head, pushed his spectacles back on his forehead,
“The fowls of the air sow not, neither do they reap, yet your Father
both his arms about rapidly and strangely, slipping farther and farther

acknowledge the genius of the Russian commanders when they speak of

brought, with some wine which the French had taken from a Russian cellar
count decided not to sit down to cards or let his girls out of his sight
during the battle, and feeling reassured he dozed off.... The dark
ourselves, dear prince,” said the little princess (of course, in
will be left! That way we shall be saying there is no God—nothing!”

brother, settling in a new house, meeting new people, and attending to

either of them. I would give my life for the happiness of them both.”



consciousness of performing a magnanimous deed—interrupted several times
“Brigand! You shall pay for this,” said the Frenchman, letting go
the gates, a group of undertakers, who hid whenever a carriage drove up,
the staff of his division to explain his violence at the commissariat
always afraid, came into her room with a peculiarly restless and malign


    Toi, sans qui le bonheur me serait impossible,
“On ne passe pas!” * cried a voice.
there. From time to time he heard a soft rustle and at times a sigh.
up the hem of her skirt.
to help at any point where the conversation might happen to flag. As
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
lying on the wolf’s back among the dogs, trying to seize her by the
your acquaintance!” he repeated again, smiling sadly, and he again
one but the Emperor of Russia has that right.
“If he manages the business properly he will be able to pay off all his
broad-shouldered soldier asked Pierre, with a grin that disclosed a set
thought this, but still sat in the same place. A strange feeling of
Smolénsk was abandoned contrary to the wishes of the Emperor and of the
behind her back. The French doctor held no taper; he was leaning
Vorónezh in the middle of September. Princess Mary, having learned of
struck, too, by the excessive contempt for others that he observed in
In the village of Hosjeradek there were Russian troops retiring from
he had already promised Prince Anatole to come to his gathering;
Rostóv, with his keen sportsman’s eye, was one of the first to catch
on the other an immense case containing icons, was brightly illuminated
At last seizing a soldier by his collar he forced him to answer.
“Drubetskóy.”
prisoners.”
exclamations, and dimly made out something leaning against the palings
with a subtle smile.

fine,” said a corporal, chaffing a thin little soldier who bent under

To clear up this last point for himself, Prince Andrew, utilizing his
apply their activities there.
Russian army.
her former infatuations,” he told himself. “There has never been
evidently those in front had halted. All remained where they were in the
hearing that Prince Andrew had come, he went out with his spectacles on
heated in a fight who strikes those on his own side, shouted angrily at

noise of firing, they came to a small wood. There it was cool and quiet,
Moscow ought to be grateful to Napoleon. It was said that Mamónov’s


And she began to cry again because he had such a noble soul.
something detrimental to the children’s interests, such as the building
“On the 4th, the first courier arrives from Petersburg. The mails
columns, with a high silk-curtained mahogany bedstead on one side and
Pierre that it was his duty to conceal the whole affair and re-establish
the whole approach on that side of it. Through the smoke glimpses could
Augesd.
chased.

it.
himself in bookish Russian.
and distraught and now unnaturally animated and enterprising.
I’ll call to kiss your hand. I’m here on business and have brought
as a friend that frees the soul grown weary in the labors of virtue
half over a sticky, muddy road, Bolkhovítinov reached Litashëvka after

Pierre, seeing a large crowd round the Lóbnoe Place, stopped and got out
The princess went up to the door, passed by it with a dignified and
responsible,” she remarked, turning to the author: “I have neither the
melting away.

and fresh rosy cheeks where soft down was just beginning to show—when

his mother he had never expected her to try to force him to sell his
went by. Then suddenly a terrible shriek—it could not be hers, she

The whole purport of his remarks now was evidently to exalt himself and
“Well!...” said the old count, spreading out his arms and sinking
them, but suddenly stopped and, clutching at his hair, burst into sobs
Natásha was in love with Borís as of old. She sang him his favorite

and Natásha with him, went to Moscow at the end of January.
And one of the soldiers, his face all at once distorted with fury,
was resolute, calm, and animatedly alert, as never before. The former
Bennigsen spoke to a general who approached him, and began explaining
told stories called it Femgálka; Karatáev and others called it Gray, or
outspread map, occasionally glancing along the road to Moscow from under
sitting so for a while he rose, and, looking about him with frightened
“With Natásha Rostóva, yes?” said he.
“Vereshchágin! Hasn’t he been hanged yet?” shouted Rostopchín. “Bring


the daughter. “Borís says his soul finds repose at your house. He has
If we assume as the historians do that great men lead humanity to the
Alpátych went back to the house, called the coachman, and told him to
thought that came into his mind was that today he had to be presented

her, were spoken as all sorts of meaningless words are spoken to comfort
that the French no longer ventured to attack.
    CHAPTER VI
Anna Mikháylovna, who often visited the Karágins, while playing cards
his energy and persistence had attained power, which he was using solely
mind, and now that they did, they did not act on him with nearly their
conciliation were discussed. In that circle they discountenanced those

with a pleasant feeling that there was something à la Louis XV in the
some bags of flour himself and throwing them into the street.

concerning herself and Rostóv—their looks and words at times seemed to
“And how about you, Count Peter Kirílych? If they call up the militia,
hide that pleasure by pretending to be busy with other interests. In
joyful animation produced by the sights and sounds of the battlefield

progenitors, the writers of universal histories, for if historical
“Faster!” came the word of command, and Rostóv felt Rook’s flanks
melodramatically gentle expression and he held out his hand.
This officer began visiting Pierre, and the princess used to make fun of
century had been the aggrandizement of Russia, that aim might have been

time could not admit the idea of his hero being disgraced.
possibility and rendered it not only difficult but impossible for the

and had remained away till he was twenty. When he returned to Moscow
“Gently, gently! Can’t you do it more gently?” said the Emperor


war, with the air of a man who knows beforehand that all will go wrong,
design for embroidery. The countess was playing patience. Nastásya
honest eyes, with the tears rising in them when she herself had begun to
personages who, in their opinion, caused what they describe as the
For a moment he dozed, but in that short interval innumerable things
should be dragged to the lockup by his hair’? (How silly!) ‘And honor
entrez dans la barque, et n’en faites pas une barque de Charon.” * There
morning Pétya was a long time dressing and arranging his hair and


“Can you imagine it?” and he began describing how the Guards, having
entered Moscow, finding it plundered, plundered it in their turn. They
agent by which nitrogen, oxygen, manure, and plow were made
“Ho, ho!” said the old man, casting his eyes on her rounded figure.
evidently forced. Not only the guests but even the footmen waiting at
mats, and was speaking to a pale young officer who lay inside.

sleeping castle. The same old stateliness, the same cleanliness, the

head.

visitors, Nicholas knew he would have to exchange his Tartar tunic for
immobile for a few moments. Then wrinkles ran over his face like a wave
the general course of affairs and as to the man to whom it had been
Rostóv wiping his muddy hands on his breeches looked at his enemy and
The latter lay silent in the sleigh with closed eyes and did not answer
quartermaster of the regiment and his commander had ordered him to
the subject of observation) the first and most primitive approximation
talk turned to the interpretation of the seven pillars and steps of the
and one booted foot, he advanced, while Willarski held a sword to his

speaking to the colonel gave Pierre an angry look and went away again
sometimes several of them merging into one, sometimes one dividing
in the sight of your most gracious presence. I raise fervent prayers to
of “author! author!” were heard in the crowd), said that “hell must be
more wily than any of them and that it would not be a bad thing if he
His thin, worn, sallow face was covered with deep wrinkles, which always
related to her meeting with Rostóv.
in this way toward an understanding of the laws of history; but it is

yet knowing whom Natásha meant by him, Nicholas or Prince Andrew.
a white belt as well. But when not on duty they will only wear a red
Napoleon looked at him.
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
of the barn, the burning grain in which diffused a cakelike aroma all
gone out.
what was to come. He was driving to the Yaúza bridge where he had heard
master and yet regretful of her cloak.
not know.
courier. “I have a sackful of letters to parents.”
Borodinó and thence turned to the left, passing an enormous number of

“This is the cause!” In historical events (where the actions of men are

“What did he say? What did he say?” Pierre heard them ask.

Before Pierre left the room Princess Mary told him: “This is the first

“Bonaparte has said so,” remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcastic
proof of the fallibility of his theory in the disasters of that war. On
princess, with the long waist and hair plastered down like a doll’s,
heard musket fire quite close in front of him and behind our troops,
destroyed her.”
the Reformation the peoples massacred one another, nor why during the

alarm lest something should have happened to the child while he was

there was little talk or thought of Moscow, and when they caught sight
“It was the officer, your honor, stained it,” answered the
reasonable to them all.
“You ought not to have been here at all,” he said.


Princess Mary was not in Moscow and out of danger as Prince Andrew
up for lost time.
the seminude women in the boxes, especially at Hélène in the next box,
did still harder work on their own land. He did not know that the priest


to above the knee. Pierre hurriedly began taking off his right boot also
not, and never did, like Speránski personally, but I like justice!”
excellent dinners for the officers at every halting place. The regiments
of which her singing had been an unusually powerful part. She gave it up
“You don’t mind your honor?” he asked Túshin. “I’ve lost my
she did not in the least understand but to which she attributed great
recruitment so as to avoid active service. The old prince and his son
“Remarks” as he termed it—which was to be transmitted to the Emperor
“Kaysárov!” Kutúzov called to his adjutant. “Sit down and write out



to get more money from the traveler.
“What can I do with them?” thought Natásha.
whether he would soon be back.
“Ah, that’s the way to talk French,” said the picket soldiers.
taken up their position and seeing troops before them, thought they were
He paused and then suddenly seeing the pistol on the table seized it
of the Bourbons plainly assert that these events were produced by the
and threw them round the little girl who had run in.
them to our Brotherhood. Only then will our order have the power

away, and the women in the house began to wail.
“It may be treachery,” said Prince Andrew, vividly imagining the
    CHAPTER XXVI
music—“it stretches, stretches, spreading out and stretching,” said
flogging was only just over, and the executioner was releasing from the
quietly, smoothly, and confidently began playing in very slow time, not

sweetest comforts to my poor heart, which has already suffered so much.
was the King of Naples that when, on the eve of his departure from that
Natásha asked nothing for herself, and gave him commissions for others
voice, “but believe me, I so adore your daughter and all your family
Several shopkeepers crowded round the officer.
from which the action is regarded. So that the greater the conception of
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use
Tranquillity is returning to this capital and order is being restored in

A few days later at one of those enchanting fetes which Hélène gave at
it never entered my head and I wouldn’t do that for their good! That’s
enter the drawing room? Even if I like him I can’t now be myself with
Anna Mikháylovna sighed deeply.
by the cut of his hair. The man lay on his back, his huge arms and legs
autumn. Pierre had gone to Petersburg on business of his own for three
a horrified expression on his handsome face, Anatole looked at Princess
to be parted from her husband and be left alone in the country, in her
“And the other one is not here. They’ve been telling tales,” he
the drawing room. He evidently tried to find something to say, but
refuse to help the peasants in need, she only feared to make some
that there were no political difficulties in Europe and no real war,
man, had not the five rubles that would make him happy.
discomfort: he was about to rise, but Véra continued with a still more
possible—but his efforts were weak and clumsy and the door, pushed from
but these did not impress him. What struck him most was the sight of a
opened in partially burned houses. The clergy resumed the services
thousand or a couple of thousand rubles.
Two of the troykas were the usual household sleighs, the third was the
in peace.
head, pulled it off, and showed the blood congealed on his hair.
in his power to regain faith in the meaning of life.


“But what are you shouting for? Calm yourself,” said Rostóv.
of the coachmen helped him into the vehicle.
proposed that they should play “Kings” with Mary Hendríkhovna. They drew
orderly by the shoulders and knocking him against the wall.


Catiche,” * muttered the prince, seating himself wearily on the chair
the carpenters cutting the timber for new houses with axes, the women
Petersburg Prince Andrew met Kutúzov, his former commander who was
under which she felt that she could not think, but would only be able to
Napoleon his waterproof boots on the twenty-fourth would have been


CHAPTER XIII

awaits...”
At that moment they heard the sound of the door pulley and footsteps in
acquaintances, but there were no men who could at all vie with the
At dinner the talk turned on the latest political news: Napoleon’s
to agree to the truce but also to offer terms of capitulation, and

them all. Sometimes he joined in a conversation which interested him

but because he knew that the enemy was beaten, as everyone who had taken
catching sight of his master from the garden path, arched his back
The doctor seemed tired and in a hurry.
Tíkhon to ask Mary Bogdánovna what news.—“Say only that ‘the
But a fortnight after his departure, to the surprise of those around
up, blushed with pleasure, forgot the official manner he had been
Pierre took his feet off the table, stood up, and lay down on a bed that
is our duty to help our neighbor. Of course he is right there,” said
I can’t,” replied Bolkónski, smiling.
The French alphabet, written out with the same numerical values as the
to Napoleon by the daughter of the Emperor of Austria, the boy whom for
Emperor from Petersburg. Before the news of the abandonment of Moscow
We have each of us two pistols.... But what’s this?” he asked, noticing

excellency cannot get away.”
when he wished to speak contemptuously, and noticing Borís, Prince
from the other room.
seizing the transports, Major Denísov, being drunk, went to the chief

Reveries about Sónya had had something merry and playful in them, but to
asked whether the samovar was really wanted.
Rostóvs at Yaroslávl she at once prepared to go there, in spite of her
the exercise book containing geometrical figures.
Prince Andrew turned away with startled haste, unwilling to let them
the honor, but I shall never be your son’s wife.”

had not known for a long time.
efforts with which he moved his tongue made her drop her eyes and with
important occasions and, adopting a quiet tone, discussed the whole
hat! Strange!” thought Pierre, continuing his way to Tatárinova.
whom the Russians, and especially the Russian ladies, then liked so
room, not stepping simply on the resounding parquet but treading with
“Even then he wanted to tell me what he told me the day he died,” she

The phaeton was full of people and there was a doubt as to where Count
Andrew which her nurse had noticed on his first visit, and Andrew’s

In the past he had never been able to find that great inscrutable
bright-blue Sèvres tea cup with shepherdesses depicted on it and with
floor of the hive, drowsy shriveled bees crawl about separately in
and then immediately fell asleep behind a partition in a corner Borís
conversation with him about marriage. She saw with sorrow, and sometimes
standing, but a moral victory that convinces the enemy of the moral
looks and manner gave that impression. The princess felt this, and as if
“Mount!” he commanded in a whisper. The men took their places and
her. “You know, Catiche, that we—you three sisters, Mámontov, and
advancing on Petersburg or on Nízhni-Nóvgorod, or retiring by a more
Baron Funke to be appointed first secretary at Vienna? The baron by all
talk and to hear a human voice. The satisfaction of one’s needs—good
As he went along he looked with pleasure at the year’s splendid crop
any town built of wood was bound to burn, quite apart from whether it
falsified them. There are always so many conjectures as to the issue of
The captain looked at Pierre. He had a habit of stopping short in the

time, seemed to him unnecessary and horrible.

was sitting. The curtains were drawn, and a single candle was burning on
presence and you stand by! What does this mean? You will answer for
coat. “Even wormwood grows on its own root.”
CHAPTER XX
with his right hand the cleanest of gloves that fitted his left hand
would have seemed so unnatural had anyone disliked him, that he could
There was now no one in the reception room except Prince Vasíli and the
for we know that he could not restrain the troops from attacking at
assigned to the commander of the Pávlograd regiment in which Rostóv
distant roar of the yelling crowd was audible even there. He hastily
business-like seriousness—leaving home for a month, or even two, with


of Russia, or of the direction of affairs in Paris, or of diplomatic
the pack. Much depended on Rostóv’s winning or losing on that seven

the impulses felt by a single person are always magnified in a crowd.
happened to be directly facing Natásha, and was struck by a curious
infinitesimals, mathematics, the most exact of sciences, abandons the


“Ah, she has come!” thought he.
did that day. But no sooner had Natásha finished her barcarolle than
slipped behind the others.
difficulty refrained from saying something harsh. She made no reply, but
smoke of the campfires the day before; but despite the incessant firing
in the forests while the dew lasted was there any freshness. But on the

the prisoners of war. Without understanding what was said to him, Pierre
whether they were talking secrets, sat down beside them. Véra, having
directed forces. In describing a war or the subjugation of a people, a
is so fond of?” He remembered his mother’s love for him, and his
watched him from the knoll.
whom the boy did not remember appeared to him a divinity who could not
his head against the floor, hoarsely uttering some word which he kept
began to arrive; and slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her
“Well! How d’ye do? How d’ye do? Glad to see you!”

bit of boastful patriotism slipped out at the end.
“Sónya, don’t believe her, darling! Don’t believe her! Do you
Although the hall porter saw someone’s carriage standing at the
pale, now blushed and strained every nerve to overhear what Nicholas
and show you what kind of rivet to use.”

down.
“Do you know,” said Natásha in a whisper, moving closer to Nicholas
contrary...”
But neither Anna Mikháylovna nor the footman nor the coachman, who
adjutant on duty to take in his name, but received an ironical look and
friend, stay here at the staff and tomorrow we’ll have a talk.”

up to her.
say he is dishonorable? Don’t you know that I love him?” screamed
there were important reasons for so doing, nodded slightly to the lady
to leave the city, others on the contrary said that all the icons had


characters and social positions. On the faces of all was one common
“Since the day of our brilliant success at Austerlitz,” wrote
“Now, Sónya!” she said, going to the very middle of the room, where
on a house close to them. Meanwhile still more projectiles, now with
(alluding to a map of love much in vogue at that time).
“A dog astwide a fence! A weal dog astwide a fence!” shouted

Suddenly a terrible concussion threw him backwards to the ground. At the

think? Was anybody ever so much in love with you? And he’s very nice,

suppose that I should look severely on your affection for that young
sharpshooters in front of our columns. The colonel at the head of the
“Oh, I took one all right,” said Tíkhon.
“The wound is not here, it is there!” said Kutúzov, pressing the


friend, but Nicholas avoided him. With that peculiar feeling of youth,

learning that he was a special messenger led him to another entrance.
A few days before the battle of Borodinó, Nicholas received the
book.

She got up.
thousand rubles a year for this art.) Everybody in the stalls, boxes,
letter.
not ten times wounded, killed, or betrayed, well... what then?...”
    CHAPTER XX
monastery), Prince Andrew, who was rather late, found the friendly
she prayed for the members of her own family, her father and mother and


“But why not?” asked the princess.
shouting and singing loudly; yet through their shouting the voice of his

taking charges from their pouches, while others were firing, though who
On reading that letter (she always read her husband’s letters) Natásha
fixing on one of those four men, whom he could not clearly see for the

intelligent, conscientious, and pedantic preceptor. The old prince

forest. Among the trees a man with long legs and long, swinging arms,

“No, my dear boy” (the count, too, felt embarrassed. He knew he had

and the munching of the lieutenant.

utter the decisive words, though in imagination he had long regarded
battle of la Moskowa. Sacré Dieu! It was splendid! That deluge of fire
else.
struggling with the yard porter who was trying to lock it. With a last
Pierre felt uncomfortable and even depressed in his friend’s company


daughter’s and move away.
the mildness of his features, was all the greater. Rostóv was happy
a deep bass guffaw as he munched a piece of bread and cheese. Gervais
duel with Dólokhov.
for the fight. Take up the spear and shield and arise to help us;
“Ve must vight to the last tr-r-op of our plood!” said the colonel,
Borís kissed Natásha’s hand and said that he was astonished at the

advocating the very thing the Emperor had hinted at the day before,
on hearing of the arrival of the letter went softly into the room and
When Pierre had gone and the members of the household met together, they
Mítenka, knew of its protective qualities.)
Natásha’s large mouth widened, making her look quite ugly, and she
goes hand in hand with self-assurance and consists in a tacit assumption

Princess Mary sighed deeply and thereby acknowledged the justice of
could not do so.
peculiarly strong effect on him because at the sight of the fire he felt

        24 guns of the artillery of the Guards

cap, who had come sailing in from another room as soon as the guests
Evidently Natásha needed to tell that painful yet joyful tale.
“Dear count, you must let me look after your daughters! Though I am
as to the only refuge from the horrors that surrounded him.


“The neighborhood of my ward continues to be pillaged by soldiers of
    CHAPTER IV
the Kirghíz horse (who performed the duties of an adjutant) to go and
toward him whom He may give me for husband.

sky presented itself to his eyes. Almost in the center of it, above the
gentlefolk, also moved away. All were moving slowly and sedately.
from the time Prince Kurákin asked for his passports. The reasons on
housing at our Moscow estate. I am sure Andrew would do even more in
began, and without replying to Sónya’s words of comfort she got into
another like a flock of sheep, squeezed into the exit, Pierre pushed
And as the undefinable essence of the force moving the heavenly bodies,
“Now then, now then!” said she.
officer named Ilyín, his protégé, was sitting in a hastily constructed
Highness bread and salt. “Her husband has welcomed his Serene Highness
happening and has to happen. There is no step, no crime or petty fraud
At seven in the morning a French convoy in marching trim, wearing shakos
After the fatigues and impressions of the journey, his reception, and

a cheerful one, Dunyásha, who went with her in the carriage, more than
When the count came to see her she turned anxiously round at the sound
with the village, the church, and the large white house. The bare trees,
rolled downwards.
repeating a lesson to himself. “Secondly,” he continued after a short
coat as he always did when he mentioned the prince.... “He has ordered
began crossing himself with the hand that held the taper.

either.”


and went to the window, involuntarily inhaling the freshness of the
When Pierre and his wife entered the drawing room the countess was in
seemed like a lifeless body, but as soon as he came up it became alive,
back on the sofa.
Shinshín. “He has stopped Austria’s cackle and I fear it will be
water over his hands. “For just one moment I didn’t look after you...
After four days of solitude, ennui, and consciousness of his impotence

despite a quarrel between their masters.
up and looked out of the window. An enormously long row of carts full of

and should first of all be freed from ineffectives, such as dismounted
tried to rise, but the borzois stuck to her. Daniel rose a little, took

mean ruin to his career, while to renew their former relations without
resolute in the discharge of duty, ran out and touching Pierre lightly

thing I have faith in! Our good and wonderful sovereign has to perform

room and still less how to leave one; that is, how to say something
after-dinner nap he gave orders to saddle Mars, an extremely vicious
our outposts, inventing on the way all that had not taken place but that
begged them to walk up. The first person who came to meet the visitors
aunt as she conducted him to her.
the table, summoned his daughter. He never gave his children a blessing,
merely for propriety’s sake in the list of the so-called heroes of
the resounding strains of the polonaise:
some dried bread with her, had spent two days in the catacombs with

Anatole went out of the room and returned a few minutes later wearing
he would be stopped once or twice more while they sent back to fetch
halves: one half is she, and there all is joy, hope, light: the



large French forces. Everyone was dissatisfied with the general course

Natásha’s affianced lover.
The friends were silent. Neither cared to begin talking. Pierre
under her white cotton cap, knelt sighing and groaning on a rug and





“look at Papa!” though as it was they never took their eyes off the
So in the same way Moscow was empty when Napoleon, weary, uneasy, and
cross the Lech, we can cross the Danube, throw ourselves on his line
“Which is he? Which?” asked Pétya in a tearful voice, of those around
made for crossing as by what took place at the bridges. When the bridges
effect that one ought not to go to the French theater and that to
heard?”
the expression she saw on the maid of honor’s face, and again relapsed


beginning to cry.
admitted to the Emperor. But it was impossible to smarten oneself up
“Perhaps it’s the state of affairs?”
was.
him if not to join in at least to listen to what he was saying. But the
St. Bartholomew was not due to Charles IX’s will, though he gave the
Meanwhile an agitated consultation was being carried on in whispers
characters (that is, re-establish the inevitable condition of all that
before December. What can be keeping him? Illness, probably! His health
Just as in a clock, the result of the complicated motion of innumerable
his will, I expect.” (One of the prince’s favorite occupations of late
He had received and given the orders for next day’s battle and had
said her eyes. She was not surprised at his having come; she did
spiritual needs, while it seems to me that animal happiness is the only
crackling of campfires and the voices of many men had grown quiet, the
shoulders, tried to impress on the soldiers the fact that Ramballe was

crowd and caps were doffed.

forward and everybody shouted “hurrah!”
crowded with peasant carts, some loaded high and already corded up,
when they heard the clatter of three horses’ hoofs on the road not far
age...”
under one command, and in a like order.
to their questions, and that the sole object of that assembly was to

river we burn the bridges to separate ourselves from our enemy, who at
being tested.
“Well, you can do that later, but the chief thing is the left flank.”
army, encamped there without any precautions. The Cossack laughingly

Tíkhon did not hear the slightest sound from the study after that.
unconciousness and oblivion which in the opinion of Napoleon’s doctor,

“I can’t. I’ve sworn not to. I won’t drink and won’t play till

hundred rubles he had not only to keep himself, his mother, and Sónya,
“I don’t like waking him,” he said, fumbling for something. “He is very
sire, mon cousin, prince d’Eckmühl, roi de Naples, and so on. But these
“I will bring him to you directly, Monsieur Dessalles. Good night!”
herself to her husband in her most becoming attitudes, or to avoid
anteroom.
by that irresistible passion for sport which makes a man forget all
hurry up and come and marry her!” thought he on his way to the house.
They were all waiting for Bennigsen, who on the pretext of inspecting
The soldiers stopped.

clearly perceive that just as one cannot imagine a blossom or seed for
these same questions which he could not solve and yet could not cease to
done—to push a cart out of the mud with one’s shoulders, pull a horse
was merely a circumstance, and Davout could have shot him without
finger? I don’t love it, but just try to cut it off!”
wounded in front of them. Almost at the head of the line she could see
“Count Rostóv.”
aside, or it would have wiped you out!”
its examination is great, and where the causes of the action are most
darkened of this man on whom the responsibility for what was happening

its rights, and the rights and the strength of France increase. The

why.

differences in the point of view from which we regard the event, but
continually glanced at Prince Andrew; Prince Andrew rubbed his forehead
market place, where there had been some rather heavy firing before the
had guarded and which is now no more. They reek of decay and death. Only
    CHAPTER XIII
Neither Pierre nor any of the others spoke of what they had seen in
her. As soon as she saw him she was seized by the same feeling she had
mistake, and that in his perception whatever he did was right, not
Princess Mary, and went in to see the prince. It happened that on that

Pierre no longer suffered moments of despair, hypochondria, and disgust
quarters and a speedy return to our country. Behave as you did at
not at once raise, and he spent most of his time in the girls’ room.
his feverishness increased and he grew delirious. Visions of his father,


reasons of state, was in favor of peace.
Andrew felt that something gave way in his soul and that he was guilty
expecting to hear something very profound. At last he came up to Morio.

Cossacks, and all who were in the camp, undressed and only just waking
“Go!” the quivering voice repeated. And Prince Vasíli had to go
battle he was always under fire, so that Kutúzov reproved him for it and
had said. On hearing that he was going to Petersburg Natásha was
was threateningly repeated and he heard the click of the man’s musket as
just as Nicholas turned to her she raised her head and met his look with
boots and the clinking of spurs that came to a stop, and a respectful

Rostóv, and sighing deeply he took Rook, his horse, which stood resting
is going as a cadet. There’s no one to interest himself for him. To
knees, and then controlling herself with an evident effort lifted her
but by promotions.) “My comrades are still nobodies, while I am only
very simple hard sofas, armchairs, tables, and chairs made by their own

an attitude of prayer, looked at the icons, repeated the words of a



Karatáev’s absence at this halt—and he was on the point of realizing
Alexander did not receive these envoys and did not reply to their
in the provinces at a distance from Moscow, ladies, and gentlemen in
Ermólov came forward with a frown on his face and, hearing what the


“Yes, and there, further on, are the French,” said the officer. “There
Which of the two?”
instructions. Toll was beginning to say something but Kutúzov checked
suspected that Russian Masonry had taken a wrong path and deviated
you know, chiefly directed to political questions. He cannot endure
destroy the structure, though it knocked against the very region of his

frightened face and bent down.
of the army into the hands of a better informed and more skillful
“Still, don’t ruin yourself!” said Dólokhov with a side glance at
“And why do you serve?”
gained a step on his old comrades of the Cadet Corps; how in wartime
The officer of the Horse Guards went to a general with whom Ermólov was
spring a new disease broke out among the soldiers, a swelling of the
When the necessary number of copies of the dispositions had been


came on, chromatic scales and diminished sevenths were heard in the

moved closer up to him.
window.


Prince Andrew knew how to take his stand so that they respected and even
well known, so much appreciated by everyone. The other day at the
interrupted her.

of Catherine’s day, turning contemptuously toward Bolkónski.
never had been sharpened.) “Can you do it?”
proves that consciousness is not subject to reason.
of that song.
“Ah, here he is!” she added. “Quand on... No, no,” she said to the
at all as I ran,” thought Prince Andrew—“not as we ran, shouting
Julie had long been expecting a proposal from her melancholy adorer and
had undertaken on his own responsibility, and began looking at the enemy
Despite her excitement, Princess Mary realized that this was the

intoxication. He felt as though he were the center of some important and
or five necessary calls or appointments for certain hours. The mechanism
the same expression on his face again swayed his head.
a commander in chief. As it was considered that the Austerlitz success
Near by could be seen the familiar ruins of a half-burned mansion

and serene expression. In her face there was none of the ever-glowing
(The most precious ones, with which some family tradition was connected,
“Go and get it for me,” said the old prince to Mademoiselle Bourienne.
On the tenth of October when Dokhtúrov had gone halfway to Formínsk and
Temple, the seven sciences, the seven virtues, the seven vices, and the
    CHAPTER IV
looking inquiringly at him and watching to see how he would behave
either in front of them or to the right or left, but there were soldiers
CHAPTER XIII
“That’s right, quite right! Just so!”
wish to dress and Mademoiselle Louise sent for me. He was naughty and
dashing young hussar!
at the French.
attentively to what Prince Vasíli said, but kept glancing at Princess
to kiss his white hands, graciously conversed with Tutólmin. Then, as
I go in then? What could he have done to me? What could I have lost? And
The little princess, like an old war horse that hears the trumpet,
The temperature shown by the political thermometer to the company that
Dimmler struck a chord and, turning to Natásha, Nicholas, and Sónya,
women.

him and drew from him an amused and gentle smile.
pointing me to a broad avenue and garden, and in the garden was a large
external world is well known, where the time between the action and
guns. On the contrary, the energetic action of that battery led the
the shed full of animation, but on seeing Prince Andrew’s face he felt
“What was the good of bringing him?” Tíkhon interrupted hastily and

Alpátych.
“The French at Vítebsk, in four days’ march they may be at Smolénsk;
fire is not an element but a phenomenon.
lovely eyes there was a look of fearful joy and hope that was also new
with Dólokhov. “None but fools trust to luck in play,” Dólokhov
varnish.
one.... How not the right one?... O Lord! And there’s another has been
front. Pierre stood smiling but silent. One man, older than the others
one feels as if one were in the country.”
I shall be very charmed to see you tonight between 7 and 10—Annette
medicine—not a disease of the lungs, liver, skin, heart, nerves, and so
a hollow between two hills near the village of Pratzen, the Russian
frequently. But wherever it may turn there always will be the wave

smile on his lips, was evidently preparing to make fun of anything that
constitute a power, then honest folk must do the same. Now that’s simple
later Sónya came to Márya Dmítrievna.
flopped against his pillow and his face. Each time the fly touched his

That day he dined with the marshal, at the same board on the barrels.
The old prince was in a good temper and very gracious to Pierre.

after himself and, in passing through to the drawing room, stopped a
and knew how unpleasant every sign of anxiety on his account was to him.
house with Prince Bagratión and Weyrother. Weyrother was the Austrian
artillerymen, some of whom were fighting, while others, having abandoned
and the brilliance of the bright sunshine merged in a single joyous and

CHAPTER III
vivid and precious memory and the personification of everything Russian,
looked at them how many Russians there were for each Frenchman and,
people,” he went on, turning to Anna Pávlovna, “he ever was a hero,
and had made desperate efforts to combat it. Since the intimacy of


I take little Másha into society? Perhaps they will be fashionable again
calf served up with sauce. They talk to us of the rules of war, of
When the body, washed and dressed, lay in the coffin on a table,
player, in spite of the burden of his equipment, rushed out to the front
—— is quite mad about her. But see, those two, though not
something as she rapidly crossed herself. Seeing her mother she jumped
responsibility himself.
anyone’s tastes or rules and regardless of anything else, it rose and
for mutilation and death, the words of posterity about their having been
his head and pointing to the plan of the building, “tell me how you mean
father, and always at the thought of enemies and those who hated her she

a fugue—though Pétya had not the least conception of what a fugue is.
or making her feel uncomfortable or displeased.
Natásha did not answer her questions.
“Ah, yes! Today’s events mark an epoch, the greatest epoch in our
“Schon fleissig?” * said Rostóv with the same gay brotherly smile
riot, but as his highest excellence said...”
made up his mind to marry her. Now in Petersburg, having considered the
“You will answer for it, Captain. It is mutiny—seizing the transport
     high time.”

that inner, spiritual force, that sincerity, that frankness of soul—that
malady it had been so agreeable to mention. Officially, at large
a wig, put his head out of the door of the antechamber, reported in
December 4. Today when Andrúsha (her eldest boy) woke up he did not
condition.

“On the box. You’ll sit on the box, won’t you, Pétya?” cried Natásha.
more settled outlook on practical matters was furnished by his decision
Andrew in the house, Nicholas never imagined him in human form.) “My
lay down on the sofa.

edge of the clearing. The seconds, measuring the paces, left tracks in
continued to be correct though he was not now in any hurry to express
difficulty but because of its incompatibility with their natures—by the
based on the consciousness of freedom.

Princess Mary, with the paper in her hand, rose from the window and with



what had happened or what she felt. Everything seemed dark, obscure,
“Look at Papa!” shouted Natásha to the whole company, and quite
looking for someone.
Kirílych—isn’t it?”

Moscow any day, the trousseau had to be ordered and the estate near
Natásha sat erect, gazing with a searching look now at her father and
involuntarily waded knee-deep in the bog.

the hut the dark shapes of the two wagons with their horses beside them


respectfully.
duration of a dream.

“Whew... whew... whew!” he whistled just audibly as he rode into the
By Agraféna Ivánovna’s advice Natásha prepared herself not in their

the avenue leading to the house as if he were entering an enchanted,
displayed during the Emperor’s stay was the call for contributions of
Archive Foundation
With trembling hands Natásha held that passionate love letter which
first-rate comrade and officer—in a word, a splendid man altogether, a

gazing now at the sovereign and now at the men intending to dance who
suggested to him a blow from something. He looked at Prince Vasíli
“And I might have been in his place!” thought Rostóv, and hardly
    * “It is the talk of all Moscow. My word, I admire you!”
free will do not exist because at an unknown period of time we sprang

“You like listening?” she said to Natásha, with a smile extremely
speech, the feeling of majestic triumph combined with pity for the foe
would then have said to me what he said the day he died. While talking
impurity we are unworthy to receive, or seek the reformation of
with quick steps.


to take only two thousand and leave the rest to repay the debt to his
when they were married, how their husbands would be friends, and how
making humiliating or cruel allusions to Sónya.

capital. Moscow, abounding in provisions, arms, munitions, and

same speed, but they kept increasing their pace, so that some of the
regiment could not be found without selling one of the estates. In
letters that had come from the Archduke Ferdinand, who was in command of
Anna Mikháylovna took off her gloves and, occupying the position she

“Bolkónski! Bolkónski!... Don’t you hear? Eh? Come quick...” he
presumptuous lieutenant who had prevented his finishing what he had to
up her skirt could not move fast enough and a piece of gauze was torn
it seemed to Princess Mary in an unpleasantly affected way. (This was
“You know—under the paperweight on the little table.”
his neighbors’ glasses, not neglecting his own. The countess in turn,


audience, which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator. Several
Andrew’s, with that latent grudge a mother always has in regard to a
shutters and bearing a bootmaker’s signboard, stood a score of thin,
them, and she doubts the means we have of gaining them. That is the
So he considered it necessary to ask for leave of absence for family and
inheritance on the death of a cousin he paid his debt to Pierre as well.
interesting and entertaining. After the field marshal’s departure
a shade of contempt for the youthfulness of this officer and with a hand
“Yes, he is a very, very kind man when he is not under the influence of
fellow.”

her feeling grief for her brother with full force; on the contrary, that
approached.
quite sincerely tried to make her look pretty. She was so plain that
count’s house was crowded on account of an approaching name day),
was stopped by French cavalry sentinels.
horse still struggled.
“Well, you know, Maman,” Nicholas interposed, knowing how to translate
you how it offended me... because... well, for that reason....”

inactive and has left the university to join the army. I will confess to
it.
sitting room.
the time had come to experience the joy of an attack of which he had so
a smile he could not repress as he recalled his reception at Brünn.
to drown his voice. Napoleon was in that state of irritability in which
“I’m heartily glad you have come and are staying with me. It was

then suddenly his whole face expanded into a beaming, foolish grin,

sovereign seemed directed merely to making him spend his time pleasantly
Milorádovich had not yet arrived with the militia, and for many other
Natásha smiled through her tears.
It is natural for a man who does not understand the workings of a
Emperor was with the first army, but not as commander in chief. In the
one would not need finesse; and he tells me that I am lying—so let him
“I consider,” Natásha suddenly almost shouted, turning her angry face to


come in?”
fields, and glittering bayonets ran past them. From the left, over



was the Emperors’ suites. The Emperors rode up to the flank, and the
as was always the case at Anna Pávlovna’s soirees, had a political



But next day no news arrived from the army and the public mood grew

humanity, modern history has postulated its own aims—the welfare of the
for Russia, for the Orthodox Greek faith! All that is beautiful, but
“Why, there, over at Échkino,” said a Cossack officer, pointing to a
doesn’t have intrigues nowadays? Why, if he was so jealous, as I see



When Kochubéy introduced Prince Andrew, Speránski slowly turned
while I feel so much strength and youth in me,” he said to himself.
CHAPTER XXVI
me to a building to enter which we had to pass along a narrow plank.
still covered her whole face.
entangled and it grew difficult to move. And Uncle Nicholas stood before
drank much, and eagerly. But those who knew him intimately noticed that
I deem it my duty to report to Your Majesty the condition of the various
is to obtain for virtue the victory over vice. This aim was that of
Both letters were written from Tróitsa. The other, from the countess,
He had grown so stout this year that he would have been abnormal had he
rending and exulting over the dying beast.
the orderlies looked at him as if they wished to impress on him that a
Pierre was sitting in the drawing room where Shinshín had engaged him,
   Enchantress, say, to my forsaken lyre
flames. Why had he fought the marauder? Pierre answered that he “was
rose before him the Danube at bright noonday: reeds, the Russian
“We are to spend the night in Znaim.”
Sónya again interrupted. She gave him an imploring, frightened look.
troops fought, and are fighting, as never before. With fifteen thousand
to one of pleasure at his admirable domestic arrangements.) “And it’s

every shade in the play of expression on the face of the man who had
Telling the groom to follow him with the horses, Pierre went down the

Several tens of thousands of the slain lay in diverse postures and
had up for a second examination, were the hardest of all for Pierre.
there is hardly time to put in action—seeing Pierre, touched his
After Pétya had joined Obolénski’s regiment of Cossacks and left for
flagging spirit of the troops would not permit it.

worn leather, and an officer’s saber with a sword knot. The Don horse
with powdery snow.
“He’s having a little fun at my expense,” said Ermólov softly, nudging

had always seemed to him that he really was very kind and intelligent.
reply.
nervous movement of his fingers he unconsciously broke the sealing wax
whiteness, and pleasant smiles.

forces now are, and then...”

grew in harmonious triumphant strength, and Pétya listened to their
“Perhaps the heart took no part in that speech,” said Anna Pávlovna.
groans, which seemed to melt into one with the darkness of the night.
puzzled smile. “I asked him whose subject he was, and he jabbered in his
milk-white sea. Nothing was visible in the valley to the left into which
And the count gave a similar order to the major-domo and the servants.
Pursued by the French army of a hundred thousand men under the command
the priest whose home it was, and that she intended to offer his Serene
he made for himself at Bucharest! I don’t speak of his capacity as a
presence.
another. And in fact his health was poor.
he had just been talking. This flattered Prince Andrew. “I have known
had very important results for him, it seemed to him—as it seems to

understand. That’s what I’m up to.”
difficulty, went to the small sitting room.
fourteen-year-old Pétya rushed in delightedly, to say that some mummers
an amphitheater, extended before him in the clear rarefied atmosphere.

his wife occupied in court circles. He was gloomy and absent-minded. A

each other, the men disperse, attack singly, run away when attacked by
Pierre all men seemed like those soldiers, seeking refuge from life:
important. And so he thought it necessary to take an interest in these
“Help comes from God alone,” he said, “but such measure of help as
the smoke, Rostóv hesitated whether to gallop after them or to go where

the more remarkable because, in spite of his great physical sufferings,
Mikháylovich Speránski. He manages everything. I’ll speak to him. He
The melancholy silence that followed was broken by the sounds of the
Staël, Talleyrand, Fichte, Chateaubriand, and others. The historian
more joyful. Still more and more joyful!” And from an unknown depth rose
Some five male domestic serfs, big and little, rushed out to the front
her,” he said.
the balk onto the ryefield, again put on speed still more viciously,
get it unraveled. I have a solution ready, but have no time now—I’ll
atmosphere made itself so strongly felt in the Rostóvs’ house as at


“You came rushing into the drawing room so that everyone felt ashamed
not only was there no wish on the Russian side to draw the French
adorer and courtier of anyone but himself, Napoleon. “Are the horses
“Here is some sort of Key to the Mysteries that your Héloïse has
in an historical sense involuntary and is related to the whole course of

to wait. Announce me.’ Vewy well, so out comes their head

toward the vanguard. Before he came up with the hussars, several
clamored for action.
had been concentrated on the Russians, as he had ordered, but that they

grandfather, wore it in all his wars.” (She still did not take out


visit http://pglaf.org
turn away to the portrait of his dead Lise, who with hair curled à la
tempest and approached her mother with rapid steps.
“‘No barrier bars a Russian’s path’—we’ll go!” shouted

has since lived peaceably and harmlessly in society seems less guilty
“Come along then! Come along then!” the publican and the tall young
living in the neighborhood of Moscow may without any danger bring their
audiences, but he does not like talking himself and can’t do it, as
(Nicholas), her resolve weakened. She wept quietly, and felt that she
began to beat on both sides of them, and at that sound Pierre felt as
were continually kissing and saying tender things to one another and

that humanity calls right or even just, the historians produce a saving
gloat over it! Gloat over it!”
Rostóv looked at the tipsy peasants and smiled.
action, this section also represented nationalism, which made them still
“One moment, Princess, one moment, my dear! Is this his son?” said the
Let us imagine two men who have come out to fight a duel with rapiers
The French who had been pursuing him stopped.
Rostóv’s inquiry where he was going, he answered vaguely and crossly
this great grief; that she felt herself blameless in regard to everyone,
to be, in the following words:
society of women was rather derogatory to his manhood. He went to balls
escorting him and the other criminals; he felt it in the looks of an
were quietly dropping melted wax into snow and looking at the shadows
“I can’t tear myself to pieces,” the doctor was saying. “Come to

departure from day to day.
And collecting the presents they went first to the nursery and then to
certain definite dependence exists between the two.
hasten abroad with post horses.
young, and because he had been an illegitimate son without a name.
nothing in Freemasonry but the external forms and ceremonies, and prized

ask him who he is,” he added.
wind to carry away. A pleasant humming and whistling of bullets were
Emperor without any definite appointments: Arakchéev, the ex-Minister
thousand rubles of their money had passed through his hands. In their
the Emperor Alexander and the King of Prussia in Berlin? If Prussia
am I to go?” thought Nicholas, and went again into the dancing room

carts would not be forthcoming.
Owing to the rapidity of the French flight and the Russian pursuit

complaints of the French as to the nonobservance of the rules, in
Prince Andrew with one word, one argument, would upset all his teaching,
Pratzen, interrupted by such frequent reports of cannon that sometimes

discover what that something was, she felt that she could not be at
“Tell what happened to the young lady!” said the second Melyukóv

took his hand and kissed it. He took this as a sign of approval and


Once she had a talk with her friend Natásha about Sónya and about her

“It seems funny to me,” said Pierre, “that you, you should
“Here’s to the health of lovely women, Peterkin—and their
I do not begin, sire, because we are not on parade and not on the
Natásha ran into the house and went on tiptoe through the half-open door
moment?” thought Princess Mary. “And that caused his sister to refuse my
we arrive at absurdity, while by admitting its motion (which we do not
‘nonsense!’”
previously selected, whereas it was fought on a quite unexpected spot
more.
To these questions three answers are possible:
“But you know how it all ended, don’t you? You heard of the duel?”
why the defeat of an army—a hundredth part of a nation—should oblige
girl who has either lost the man she loved or been cruelly deceived by
it was coming, he did not till the last moment wholeheartedly believe
All along the sides of the road fallen horses were to be seen, some
    CHAPTER VI
Well, are you coming with me?” he asked Pétya.

been thinking about you.”

“He was gray, you remember, and had white teeth, and stood and looked


“And how she dances! What gwace!” he said again after a pause.
angry, quarreled, said they had come quite wrong and were late, gave

said that the fiscal system must be reorganized and the accounts
“Natásha, I don’t understand you. And what are you saying! Think of
expeditiously, unnecessary things were left, and the most valuable
herself should she glance round. Anna Mikháylovna, with a meek,
itself and the moon, and... all this rushed suddenly to his mind.
spoken to the gentleman ranker, he addressed him with the cordiality of
afraid of Márya Dmítrievna that she always let her have costumes at
did not please the sixteen-year-old officer. Though she concealed from

I have just returned from my benefactor, and hasten to write down what I
blushing and dropping her eyes.
especially that Natásha would now be herself again.
“Immediately, I’m coming, I’m coming!” replied the princess hurriedly,
this strong, brave man, this model son and officer that, judging by this
her, for what she was suffering now while she was speaking.
waited in expectation of an important order for an expensive funeral.
In front of the Governor’s house Alpátych found a large number of
The last words were read out in the midst of complete silence. The tall
it. The Cossacks were untying their horses and tightening their saddle
“Well, let’s have another bottle of this Moscow Bordeaux, shall we?
There won’t be any end to it.”
“Come,” said the doctor.
her neck as soon as she overtook her in the sitting room.
told everyone that she did not believe either in friendship or in love,
He did not find the civil servant or his wife where he had left them. He
before, and immediately continued:
galloping toward him. They were our Uhlans who with disordered

carters removing valuable goods, such as cloth, and receiving in payment
Princess Mary looked at him silently and smiled affectionately.

the crossing of the Berëzina that destroyed the French army. In reality
his stature, saw over the heads of the others what so attracted their
eyes with such an enraptured caressing look that it seemed strange to be

the best horses, and promised to assist him in every way.

how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
have the wolves eaten you? Fetch some more wood!” shouted a red-haired
CHAPTER XII
“It’s the steam that spoils them,” he added, stretching out his feet
it. Princess Mary had sought the meaning of his words in the mood in
he had come, or what was happening to her. When she saw his Russian
feel afraid.”

heard the sound of voices behind them.

the Armenian family and at two French soldiers who had gone up to them.

who—apparently quite unclothed—sat with a quiet tranquil smile, not
not so mad as I seemed. On the contrary I was then wiser and had


Sometimes he consoled himself with the thought that he was only living
know how to equip Borís.” She took out her handkerchief and began to
Hendríkhovna should stir the sugar for everyone in turn. Rostóv received
“I was driving past Yusúpov’s house just now,” said Berg with a laugh,
Napoleonic alliance, the circle of Count Rumyántsev and Caulaincourt.
him married to Julie. I am so fond of Julie that I should be sorry for
evening the sky cleared again and the sun set in reddish-brown mist.

but managed meanwhile to look round repeatedly at his neighbor, the
Natásha laughed, and the countess too smiled slightly.

Prince Eugène of Württemberg fired from a hill over the French crowds
done. Have you chosen a post in which you might be of service to your
us—we scuttle. He hardly crosses the river to our side before we
“Don’t like bowwowing from my own fellows, I don’t,” growled
giving them employment; to the legitimists of that day that it was the

arrive. The French, avoiding the Russians, dispersed and hid themselves
Like wind over leaves ran an excited whisper: “They’re coming!
Túshin’s large, kind, intelligent eyes were fixed with sympathy and
“Wait a bit, I have something in view for you this evening.”

day.
as she who had herself suffered so much could render, and showed him

hunting party was.
face instantly changed and assumed an offensively affected, sugary
not to tell the whole truth which she saw. And suddenly, Natásha’s lips
vessel and judge of its purity? Only by the inner purification of myself
chance and genius become superfluous.
was being done. And he fell back into that artificial realm of imaginary
were heard in the room. Natásha looked round at her, and then, red
strengthen the fire on the Russian troops crowded in front of Knyazkóvo.
their meaning but must keep them. The second pair of man’s gloves
daughter.
trouble. You’ll see what a mess there’ll be tomorrow.”
struggles of a certain Emilie de Mansfeld. “And why did she resist

“It’s wonderful what a lot of our troops have gathered, lads! Last
all be done properly, according to rule. Look here, put it under the
“But above all,” added Prince Andrew, “I have grown used to my regiment,
the undefinable essence of the forces of heat and electricity, or
was laughing at something, mingled in a merry sound, like the chirping
daughter whenever he chanced to see her:
“All right. Fifty imperials ... that I will drink a whole bottle of


so terrible to the soldiers, despite his furious purple countenance
the enemy, came with jingling spurs up the steps of the porch, despite
ever-quickening music, being the rhythmic click of the spurs on his
Having restored the condition of time under which all events occur,
extend farther than the western, the Polish, provinces.
Though Rostóv told the governor’s wife that he would not make any

neutrality is just a trap. I have faith only in God and the lofty
lived for a whole eternity.”

the clearing from which Denísov had reconnoitered the French camp,

clearly seen against the white snow. From that sleigh one could hear the
shower shells on the Russian flèches and redoubts. This could not be
This active old servant was unpacking the traveler’s canteen and
saying.
little icon with its thin gold chain suddenly appeared upon his chest
disapprovingly, but in whispers and as a great secret.
expressed. The ridicule and contempt were of course expressed in a
Ostróvna he was brought into notice, received command of an hussar

commissariat did not always keep up with the troops)—they would have
Quartermaster General Prince Volkónski, as well as generals, imperial
“The chairman of the Committee on Army Regulations is my good friend
away but that had seemed the only thing to do.
bast matting and cover it with hay—that’s the way!”
from the greater or lesser fulfillment by the rulers of these unknown
into a heap of meaningless rubbish. Though he did not acknowledge it to
hill one after the other. Their colonel, Karl Bogdánich Schubert, came
Their conversation was very simple and unimportant. They spoke of the
“A present to Your Majesty from the Empress.”
The very day that Napoleon issued the order to cross the Niemen, and
with Prince Bagratión’s detachment.”


On the twenty-eighth of October Kutúzov with his army crossed to the
brag about it, but if he stays out till morning it means he’s lost and
about his subordinate Pryánichnikov addressed a question to him.
the extinction of life there is a severance, a spiritual wound, which
the possibility of failure and so forth.
He again paused in indecision.
any administrative or public business whatever from the lowest to the
highroad, passing through a village with a white church some five


Pierre sat down with his little partner. Natásha was perfectly happy;
desire war and as Your Majesty sees...” said Balashëv, using the words
at first from afar he heard men’s voices and then women’s. The voices
I entreat you, don’t philosophize, don’t doubt, marry, marry,
sorrowful, and at variance with his parents, but, as it seemed to him,

his correspondence with Kúrbski?
before. Having taken a kerchief from the cupboard, Willarski bound
which was littered with books and papers. The princess was as untidy as
     Sighing its message out to thee...
indiscretion, one might ask about our plans.
anyone, but wanted nothing for herself. She kept away from everyone in
Arakchéev on the military. Soon after his arrival Prince Andrew, as a


Then two pairs of Frenchmen approached the criminals and at the
“Think what you please! I know you are just like Father. Think as
their feeling of hostile distrust gradually began to change into a
and coldly cruel expression that had struck Pierre that morning on the
“You see, brothers, I know it’s hard for you, but it can’t be helped!
and relations had been given to understand that the fate of the young
    CHAPTER XVII
this he replied that one should not deprive a wife of one’s embraces

invisible power at any moment to take her and deliver her from herself,
grew calm, but was not immediately ready to reply to the Emperor’s


“So you are not afraid to play with me?” repeated Dólokhov, and as
The council of war, at which Prince Andrew had not been able to
she needs one of her own kin. But in your Club they have been making him
in his movements, in his walk, scarcely a trace was left of his former
(She used the word “diplomat,” which was just then much in vogue
children. The German tutor was trying to remember all the dishes, wines,
At first he spoke with the amused and mild irony now customary with
he would say. “I am quite out of horses. Let me have what you can to

seen. Prince Andrew stopped and began examining the position.
train of thoughts and feelings arose in her. “What did Nicholas’
audacity. Dólokhov, who needed Anatole Kurágin’s name, position, and
irresistibly attractive to Pierre.
for society.”
    * Large battalions are always victorious.

death,” thought Bolkónski.



men, who here, as in Vienna, formed a special set which Bilíbin, their
dinner and looked about, blinking and scowling, or, with fixed eyes and

Terrible anguish struck her heart, she felt a dreadful ache as if
Vasíli had aged and whether Countess Mary Alexéevna had sent greetings
Princess Mary more than anything else; this was his ever-increasing

“Not at all,” said Prince Andrew.

Whether Kutúzov was thinking of something entirely different when
“And our share?” asked the princess smiling ironically, as if
someone was uttering or that he himself was formulating.
with a few of them at the balls. But he did not run after the unmarried
expressed)—this came about because his commands did not correspond to
and irrationally. But later on, to fit what had occurred, the historians
looking at Natásha.
They all went without knowing whither or why they were going. Still less
            100  110  120  130  140  150
collective will of a people to certain historical personages is an
He began speaking louder, evidently to be heard by everyone.
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
soul. It vanished as soon as he returned to the customary conditions
Yet he loved “our Russian peasants” and their way of life with his whole

conscious of the warmth of her body, the scent of perfume, and the
Murmurs arose among the wounded who were waiting.
judge of his every word and action whose judgment mattered more to

blush.
carry them out, so he takes a regiment, a division—stipulates that no
know!” and the Frenchman with the spot on his cheek ran back to his
the enemy from flank and rear and securing from the Ukraine recruits for

trying through the Dowager Empress Márya Fëdorovna to secure it for
Pierre was evident. She kept an anxious watch on him when he approached
the mother. “Ah, my dear, I can’t tell you how fond I have grown

Sónya had not seen anything, she was just wanting to blink and to get

were crowding to warm themselves at campfires. Near Dóbroe an immense
A murmur of approbation and satisfaction ran through the crowd. “He’ll
brother-in-law had proposed to her and been refused. It seemed to
and gave me to understand that that was my duty. But I replied that

asked Daniel, who was standing near.
her go to the dressing room to rearrange her dress, that Hélène had
of greeting, he asked Pierre whether the soldier Platoche to whom he had

wound bandaged. Water was being sprinkled on his face. As soon as Prince

and even an emperor. Before leaving, Napoleon showed favor to the

accord with the proclamation of his highest excellency the count, they
compared to the magnitude of the events, and by its impotence—apart
him not with hope of finding signs of improvement but wishing to find

been ordered to attack Formínsk. But only Broussier had been there at
Caesars, Alexanders, Luthers, or Voltaires, and not the histories
a plateful of biscuits brought him and began throwing them down from

Kutúzov did not understand what Europe, the balance of power, or
current of his thoughts, “that Anatole is costing me forty thousand
him imploring him to come if only for a few minutes to discuss a most
going into a tiny recess behind a partition to change, but found it

      For drinking, for fighting,
and, whatever may happen to him or to me, shall never cease to love him

bitch that caught it! Go to law, indeed!... He snatches at the fox! I
not a logical answer and not at all a reply to them. The answer was:
same way, he feels as certainly convinced as before the experiment
regiment was stationed at Tver he had taken him from Tver in the
“What are you pushing for? Is the fire only for you? Look how he’s
“England is done for,” said he, scowling and pointing his finger
like that, and Pierre was released. Natásha on one side was talking


said more. “To search far,” he said, turning back the skirt of his
conceit prevents your apologizing, and you wish to make the whole
The countess was pleased with Natásha’s zeal; after the poor results of
Since then Pierre had not been disturbed and had spent the whole time in
The women’s vehicles drove by. Behind them came more carts, soldiers,
to physical causes; but Princess Mary thought he wished to tell
“Sire?” asked the adjutant who had not heard the remark.



Natásha was going to her first grand ball. She had got up at eight that
“And should your Serene Highness require a man who will not spare his
On Kutúzov’s staff, among his fellow officers and in the army
off his cloak.
he had respected so highly as Platón Karatáev.
his magnanimous plans, was pacing patiently up and down before the
from the sound by a barefooted girl, and a stout, rosy, good-looking
Empress. In Hélène’s circle the war in general was regarded as a series
not wish to see him, and would even avoid another meeting with him—an
interested to know how Prince Andrew had taken the news. Ten minutes
maid who was dressing it had not time to release. “That bow is not
the first time, that he may not make a mistake and fall into the enemy’s
did. “But best of all you have brought yourself back—for I never saw
read this in Tíkhon’s face and in that of Prince Vasíli’s valet,
arms round his neck, and he pranced along with her.
dead and so-and-so was married, which she would again be unable to
victory be in doubt, even for a moment, you will see your Emperor
Princess Mary paused, uncertain whether the time had not already come to
have with the actual fact of slaughter and violence: why because the
trembling with emotion, solemnly holding up in both hands before her
tone.


Dron.
his dream of happiness.

now taking place.
Among the many young men who frequented her house every day, Borís

now aiming, now counting the charges, now giving orders about replacing

more noticeable how much plainer she had become. Some unobtrusive touch
at the arsenal: sabers, pistols, and muskets which could be had at a low
The doctor went into the passage to wash his hands.


began talking loudly, to stifle their feelings of pity as it seemed to
Perónskaya a maid of honor, Pierre Bezúkhov, and the son of their

CHAPTER V
the aim was the aggrandizement of France, that might have been attained

with a sob.
“Robbery and pillaging continue. There is a band of thieves in our
of mind, Pierre carried out an intention he had long had of visiting his

asking for forgiveness.
Then suddenly it became clear to Sónya that Natásha had some dreadful

men.

invited here, but our allies don’t like it at all.”
her spirituality and at the lofty moral world, almost beyond his reach,
this to his daughter, but Natásha noticed her father’s nervousness
“Very glad,” answered Nicholas. “He is an excellent fellow.... And
But Pierre was not listening to the woman. He had for some seconds been
treatment and did not value her life.
life: belief in life and its enjoyment.
impetuously toward the embankment to watch the firing. Pétya too would

that Princess Mary and Natásha exchanged glances, evidently wondering
man. The Revolution was a grand thing!” continued Monsieur Pierre,
goodness, to give us as sovereign! To say nothing of my brothers, this
Discussions and questions of that kind, which are like the question of
definite idea of her, he turned away and addressed Michael Ivánovich.
tomorrow, that no one would deprive him of his warm bed, and that he
man’s high, stout, uncovered chest and powerful shoulders, raised by
so as not to make a mistake this time but seize his hind leg.
that I knew in the past. The whole world is now for me divided into two
“Are those our men there?” Pierre inquired.
over his spectacles, and then again resuming his walk, muttering


position seems to them insoluble. But the wave they feel to be rising
because Kutúzov had paid no attention to his offer to take part in the
“What is the matter, Mary?”
Burning lips were pressed to hers, and at the same instant she felt
Natásha put her hand on her mother’s mouth.
Firmly convinced as he was of the truths revealed to him by his
Anna Mikháylovna came out last. She approached Pierre with slow, quiet
breast with the other hand and to repeat after someone who read aloud
Russian army will be fully equipped, and shall then, in conjunction with
something stronger and more important than his own will—the inevitable
what they said, but did not understand the meaning of the words and
much the same as usual. These dispositions and orders only seem worse
He read, and read everything that came to hand. On coming home, while
teatime she would prepare the countess, and after tea, with God’s
Pelagéya Danílovna Melyukóva, a broadly built, energetic woman
Channel. I think the expedition is quite feasible. If only Villeneuve
was still, warm, and silent. Occasionally the whistle of a huntsman,
our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
people’s change of direction, are no longer in front, but on one side,
upper lip and her half-open mouth—seemed to be her own special and
any clever conversation that was to be heard. Seeing the self-confident


him.
hesitation, rapidly threw off his uniform and put on the shirt. He had
laugh at me!”


he made up his mind that Prince Andrew had been killed, and though he
Princess Mary and Natásha, who did not leave him, felt this. They did
with enjoyment, gazing with ever-increasing amiability at the other

stood rather far off and could not hear all that the Emperor said. From
kisses. Her looks asked him to forgive her for having dared, by
could not be. Napoleon did not give his Guards, not because he did not
inevitability, what is unknown to us we call vital force. Vital force is
shown to the best room, which Dólokhov had taken for that evening. Some
about two thirds of a mile was stopped on the highroad. Rostóv saw the
to the greater or lesser interval of time between the commission of the

In this question he saw subtle cunning, as men of his type see cunning
brother a small, oval, antique, dark-faced icon of the Saviour in a gold
thwee hundwed men to town under escort, instead of staining—I speak
“Yes, my dear Monsieur Pierre, I owe you a fine votive candle for
“The means are ... the balance of power in Europe and the rights of
differently, but I’m sorry for your father, so I will conceal it.”


had not finished saying what was necessary, thudded into the ground near
companion was found robbed and with his throat cut. A bloodstained knife
man in a frieze coat dragging burning beams into another yard across the
and threw it up.
CHAPTER III
that. It always seems to me...”
means of arousing him.

need to hurry. However, he put his horse to a trot in the direction
his answer. Rostóv noticed by their faces that all those gentlemen had
impassive face of Oriental type, came out after the commander in chief.
fugitives returned, the battalions re-formed, and the French who had
evening at the Melyukóvs’, the girls went to their bedroom. When they
in his pocket, folded up his papers, and called in Alpátych who had long
appeared a stupid smile of glee which he seemed unable to suppress.

Countess Rostóva, with her daughters and a large number of guests, was
he been doing all this time?”
exception made, and Borís transferred into the regiment of Semënov

“But in what am I to blame?” she asked herself. And his cold, stern look


tiny limbs she had felt twenty years ago within her, that son about whom
regulate his life and that of the whole family exactly as he chose. At

of needles, he also saw by glimpses a red halo round the candle, and
by distributing arms and broadsheets had taken steps to remove all

Nicholas, in his old lady’s dress over which he had belted his hussar
ready, with a fan in her hand. “No, she’s altogether different. I
Pávlovna’s, an unacknowledged sense of the guilt of that desire

could not say with certainty whether the attack had been repulsed or his
remarks. The old count rose once more, glanced at a note lying beside
commonplace occurrences. A battery of artillery was passing in front of
do?”
advancing from Russia, without losing his army as Mack had done at Ulm.
would not be able to move on for some time, Alpátych got down and turned
that something had gone wrong. He expected the wolf to come his way any
confidence of many highly placed persons, had been initiated into many
repeated one and the same thing a hundred times, remarked to his
the maintenance of the balance of power of Europe, and it would save the

is true, but by those who had abandoned it and not by those who remained
before any of the others. Behind, along the riverside and across the
Only when Prince Andrew was gone did Rostóv think of what he ought to
Austrians, and all at once discovered from the cannon balls discharged

The exhausted French officer was Ramballe and the man with his head


by an act worthy of himself and of the French army, he let relief

the innumerable causes of the act is known to us we recognize a certain
“What for?” asked Alpátych.
From the deafening sounds of his own guns around him, the whistle and
huts of that large village. The Rostóvs’ servants and coachmen and the
among these men twenty thousand are doomed to die, and they wonder at my
concern for the safety of the arsenal at Túla, and especially the
we parted. Why are we not together as we were last summer, in your big
front.
These sights and sounds had no depressing or intimidating effect on him;
minutes later crowds of wounded men and stretcher-bearers came back from
now.”


been won. To speak of what would have happened had Napoleon sent his
CHAPTER IV
Then a general rode past shouting something angrily, not in Russian.
Kutúzov’s order to retreat through Moscow to the Ryazán road was issued
vish to destroy my men for your pleasure!”
rivers for everybody, that the seas should be common to all, and that

(for they were speaking French) at least with a Russian who would, he
given a shirt to sew was in that shed.
room.
“Yes, he’s a dear, but very absurd.”
of years’ time.
announced with such solemnity and significance that the official turned
digested his sufferings alone.
“Yes, your excellency,” said Gerásim after thinking for a moment.
reinstate another omitted condition of every command proceeding not from
“Yes, yes,” the governor’s wife said as if talking to herself. “But,
means of his broadsheets and posters, written in a coarse tone which the

fist of his newly bled arm so violently that the table nearly broke down
The actions of Napoleon and Alexander, on whose words the event seemed
princess, looking at Anna Mikháylovna as at a stranger.
unknown factor—the spirit of an army—is a problem for science.
nuisance to everybody, that snub-nosed Pétya with his merry black eyes
holding up a threatening finger. “He is such a worthy and excellent
a child does with naïvely pouting lips, and again bowed till he touched
themselves or lifted their thin yellow faces, and all looked intently at
but I am not praying for trifles now,” he thought as he put his pipe
reproved Bezúkhov for his vehemence and said it was not love of virtue
whistling of projectiles, and the piteous moaning of the cook, which
head gravely.
and enthusiastic appearance that made her glad.
the ebb and flow of these sounds.
But before he reached them Pierre stopped beside a very handsome, dark
The naturalists and their followers, thinking they can solve this

he had ready in his mind, of all he knew and had seen. But the Emperor
that the hussars must return quickly and fire the bridge.’”
before her eyes, began singing again, and again began walking up and
Vílna; or remain in Moscow; in short, no special genius would seem to be
“Is it possible that I—the ‘chit of a girl,’ as everybody called
significance of the presence of the Emperor and of all these people,
smile. Alexander was saying something affable to him.


CHAPTER XIII


The bees circle round a queenless hive in the hot beams of the midday
play. Involuntarily he felt a joyful agitation at the thought of the

“Well, what is it tonight?” said the mother, having arranged her

looking at the prisoners who thronged past him.
Princess Kurágina, a portly imposing woman who had once been handsome,
the same question, and beg you to choose a good moment to hand him the
to be taken out and given some tea. The pain caused by his removal into
disposition. They were called steppe peasants. The old prince used to

she began to tell of how at Potsdam the impious Bonaparte had stolen the

this—sheer robbery! If you please, could not guards be placed if only to
his acquaintance and joyfully welcomed the rich newcomer, the

“Well, go, go! If anything more is wanted I’ll send after you.”
him the French alphabet, she so longed to pour her own knowledge quickly
the full moon fell on the floor. Dimmler had finished the piece but
He felt that he had to balance carefully (though it was difficult) so
The seventh party consisted of the sort of people who are always to

would get on together. The husband, however, did not seem to share that

freedom, equality, and progress (these, I think, cover the ground). Let
the agility with which he capered about on his light feet, Márya
Nicholas said nothing. He flushed crimson, left her side, and paced up
“La femme est la compagne de l’homme,” * announced Prince


French to suppose that here—in the center—the main Russian forces

cultivated, and capable of the young men. Forgive my vanity as a
“Ask them,” replied Prince Andrew, indicating the officers.
to that burnt-cork mustache, that he had fully learned to know her. And
off, and the firing had begun to subside. Suddenly, near by on the
Prince Andrew sighed and broke the seal of another envelope. It was
camp.
them!... Really now, in our own yard—we asked them in ourselves and

and who at the best if the flight continued would have to go a greater

at Prince Andrew with cool intensity, walking straight toward him and
him he sprang aside in terror and clutched at Pierre. (Pierre shuddered
of life that had seized Natásha was so evidently irrepressible and

    CHAPTER X
his pocketbook.
CHAPTER VIII
Maria Theresa Order of the third grade, which the Emperor was conferring
men was to attack the French from different sides. The old prince did
Nicholas, having as usual exhausted two pairs of horses, without
love of death. He consoled himself with the thought that he fulfilled
I’ll just finish dealing, and then Ilyúshka will come with his
from this distressful life, and leads it to its place of recompense and
CHAPTER VIII
must take the same terrible step.
Men are hauling a log. Each of them expresses his opinion as to how and
fresh and dewy. A herd of cattle was being driven along the road from


of feeling Pierre had noticed the day before and had fully understood
aspects of humanity.”
the Russian people, the causes and meaning of which are so baffling to
the princess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette, as if without this
he was in contact with the springs that set in motion the enormous
His head steward came to him at Orël and Pierre reckoned up with him his

busy, and busy making his father comfortable, while evidently he,
meeting, they had kissed each other, but today they felt it could not
he looked at and listened to Willarski, it seemed strange to think that

of him and the same words rose to his lips. But she did not give him

neglect him in favor of my own: we all have children and relations while
Title: War and Peace
The face of the little princess changed. She sighed and said: “Yes,
Anatole stopped him.
historians.
When the count returned, Natásha was impolitely pleased and hastened
which they were all to be converted; then of some proclamation of the
soul. Never will that moment return for him or for me when he might have
“Well, thank God! We’ve been sitting here too long!”
agitation and obscurity. He fell asleep.

had prayed, but by some ordinary coincidence.
army’s campfires dimly glowing in the fog, could be seen behind him;
Suddenly and simultaneously a crowd of memories awoke in his fancy—of
“Oh, hush, please!” said another.
Michael Ivánovich did not at all know when “you and I” had said
misunderstandings were at an end; that availing herself of the

into three armies. First, the army under Barclay de Tolly, secondly, the
Having listened to her mother’s objections, Hélène smiled blandly and
Some of the men bared their heads, others stared at the new arrivals
long—I shall soon set him free.”
delay and advised waiting for something else before advancing had been
respected and feared her.

Having said this, Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes, who, hat in

turned to leave the room, but Pierre held her hand.
At the appointed hour the prince, powdered and shaven, entered the
Chance, millions of chances, give him power, and all men as if by

The two remarkably pretty girls, Natásha and Sónya, with Count Rostóv
it, and again the women and men of weaker mold, Pétya among them, wept
understand how a man of his immense intellect can fail to see what is
with him in Naples. Then suddenly, as if remembering his royal dignity,

involuntarily passed round in a curve and came upon the large house
the different streets with one and the same desire to get on quickly;
“You know Sónya, my cousin? I love her, and promised to marry her, and

arrive, the men dispersed about the abandoned and deserted villages,
gloves given to a newly initiated Brother to present to the woman he
burn which is left by its owners and in which strangers are allowed to
The discussions continued a long time, and the longer they lasted


from choking, Sónya, pale and trembling with fear and agitation, sat
women.”
and under that appellation, which to Pierre seemed terrible, they were


crossness worried her. She got up and, walking on tiptoe with

She would like to be married to all three at the same time,” thought he.
not refrain from grumbling at and worrying Sónya, often pulling her up
looking with tender affection and pity at Mademoiselle Bourienne’s
words of Rostopchín, that French soldiers have to be incited to battle
of the action balls and shells began flying all over his regiment and
from him and glanced sadly at one another with a sigh at his naïveté.
At the summit of the hill they stopped with the icon; the men who had
Late one evening the Rostóvs’ four sleighs drove into Márya
suffer for it.”
Bourienne and could not bear to see her, thereby showing how unjust were
without turning their heads glanced at one another, curious to see their

forgotten. Our duty, my dear, is to rectify his mistake, to ease his
“Remember, for you everything depends on this.”



    CHAPTER VII

checked himself.

A member of the Hofkriegsrath from Vienna had come to Kutúzov the day
everything and felt a wish to contradict. Though he usually spoke easily
retreat during the finest period of summer and with sufficient supplies
story), and how Rostopchín let him go and assured the people that he was
If throughout his reign Napoleon gave commands concerning an invasion


men disfigured by fear of death now crowded together, crushing one
opinions, but you see what a capital, good-natured fellow I am.” And
and until you have ceased to love the woman of your choice and have seen
The second order was that Poniatowski, moving to the village through the
and he led him into the room where the supper table was laid and
speech was full of dignity and greatness as Napoleon understood it.

corridor the sound of several hands knocking at the front door could be
dragoons. In the center, where Túshin’s battery stood and from which
conceal its effects—the surroundings in which he had been happy became
dark-haired, remarkably slim, pretty girl in a yellow chintz dress, with
It was a warm, dark, autumn night. It had been raining for four days.
The soldiers went out again, and the orderly, who had meanwhile had time
awful...” and to escape from these dreadful thoughts she went to
December.
historic personage.
to the former belief in the direct intervention of the Deity in human
which is hidden in heaven,” said Pierre.
all at once it grew light in his soul and the veil that had till then
soldiers only need to be restrained and held back! On all sides, new and
Denísov after him (the most insulting expression a cavalryman can
eyes fixed on the cavalry below them.
to answer it.
CHAPTER I
became strange, confused, and misty in Pierre’s eyes.

Denísov, and others like them (in his dream the category to which these
doctrines as causes of events, as soon as they have to describe an
suppressed smile brightening both their faces, a smile that had nothing
actresses—with the chief of whom, Mademoiselle George, he was said to
committed. Can I lift my arm? I lift it, but ask myself: could I have
the countess interrupted him.
face and a string of pearls round her thick red neck—which Natásha

right to reject him. Naturally neither Natásha nor her parents wished
a train of loaded sleighs and drove right over two of them. Eh?”

snap.
“Karatáev!” came to Pierre’s mind.
year earlier might have ruined him, has reached its extreme limit, and
When with due circumspection Napoleon was informed that Moscow was
attention. Moreover, everybody knew vaguely of Natásha’s engagement
     * The most fascinating woman in Petersburg.
“Why do you say that?” Natásha interrupted him. “You know that
“I don’t understand,” continued Ilágin, “how some sportsmen can
drink, a drink!” Rostóv glanced round, looking for someone who would
continued, with that gay brotherly cordiality which goodhearted young
father’s illness, since his death, and especially since her meeting with
at the least firing. The Emperor’s gratitude was announced to the
battalion would follow him.
dinnerless, had been whipped and sent to the village in quest of
one another, beginning to see one another through the mist. They had the
administrator finds the chief reward of his labor and efforts. While the


challengingly into Pierre’s eyes.
rescue. Pierre had managed to start a conversation with the abbé about
wanted. He was lifted up, carried to his study, and laid on the very
If power be the collective will of the people transferred to their
having to direct a battle he did not approve of, got into his calèche


a soldier in a peaked cap and blue overcoat, lit up by the fire, was



from seeing his face, moved away.
the road disappeared into a yellowing forest on the horizon. Far in

    CHAPTER VI

passing people who looked after him with curiosity, he entered the porch
Dear and precious Friend, How terrible and frightful a thing is
She pushed the little dog off her lap and smoothed her dress.

She drew near to him and stopped. He took her hand and kissed it.

serfs. The only thing that made Princess Mary anxious about him was that

one plan, Armfeldt another, and they are all good and all bad, and the
himself against his legs.
Bonaparte’s new triumph, tomorrow’s levee and parade, and the


wish nothing but to relive it all from the beginning.”
her long hair came down....” Here he could contain himself no
one of the tents and there stopped, awaiting instructions. Prince Andrew
in that happy mood in which everything seems possible and everything

of cause, mathematics seeks law, that is, the property common to all
power suppressed the ideas of the Revolution and the general temper of
the countess.
spread out her arms to show her short-waisted, lace-trimmed, dainty gray
his colonel in alarm. His face twitched, as often happens to soldiers


The day after the council at Málo-Yaroslávets Napoleon rode out early in

single day of that time! But it was gone forever. Her presentiment at
learned still another new, consolatory truth—that nothing in this world

bandolier, while another smoothed and refolded his leg bands and put
in her room crying like a child, blowing her nose and sobbing. Sónya
letter, he now was.
marked the change? I sat all the time in this same place at this table,
preparations for it with unparalleled solemnity. This Kutúzov who before
Sónya and Dólokhov before dinner, and with the kindly sensitiveness
friends with my little fool, Princess Mary,” he shouted after Pierre,

blissful smile.

tradesman’s wife standing beside Pétya sobbed, and the tears ran down
especially the youngest, the pretty one with the mole, who often made
    CHAPTER III
replied.
without obtaining the desired result. Then it occurred to him: if the


“That’s always the way,” thought Countess Mary. “He talks to everyone

winning, suddenly just when he has calculated all the chances of the
moment when the first report was heard a fourth was seen. Then two
of the hand on the dial of human history.
essence of the matter aside, shut out the possibility of that essence’s

they were not Christians, but they too have souls. It’s what the old
Every detail of the interview was communicated to the Russian monarch,
done to attain an end worthy of the nation, and they are not to blame
At dawn on the sixteenth of November, Denísov’s squadron, in

expected to be at once presented to the Emperor. At the chief entrance
sorts of things, consider it necessary to do everything in a mean and

bring them the keys of the city.
poetic, charming girl, overflowing with life!”
that action of his might be. He was convinced that, as a duck is so made
widened and lit up.
then there are you and the children and our affairs. Is it for my own
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
they would have been made public,” he said with warmth and haste. “I do
Princess Mary pressed his hand. The pressure made him wince just
In 1812 it reaches its extreme limit, Moscow, and then, with remarkable
wrote himself,” said she through her tears.

the absence of a moral barrier between them.
“What is it?”

away.
dresses, condemned the bearing of a lady standing close by who was not
        “It’s a long, long way.
aroused in himself.
They were to call for her at her house in the Taurida Gardens at ten

“Shall we have time to change clothes?”
be so good as to set off for Kalúga on receipt of this, and there await
artillery company, a head and shoulders taller and twice as broad
according to all the rules of art, and, presenting the hilt of their

incline before reaching Boguchárovo, and Rostóv, outstripping Ilyín, was
“Yes, and to drink,” assented Nicholas. “Hullo there! Another
CHAPTER V

self-derision genuinely Russian. Bilíbin wrote that the obligation of
drawn with Kutúzov; and how they would make suggestions, quarrel, issue
time.
everything. I often wonder at you, Annette—how at your age you
chief, and our first foe, Buxhöwden, is vanquished; we can now turn

Napoleon felt this, and from the time he took up the correct fencing
felt a responsibility for all that was happening in Europe; and not
martial touch appropriate to a campaign. He wore a long coat and like
Coming out onto the road Dólokhov did not ride back across the open
justification in the belief that among the hundreds of thousands who
understand it’!... And I ask you!”
full and with the horses harnessed, stood at the front door. One by one

Soon he really shut his eyes and fell asleep. He did not sleep long and

“You won’t deign to demean yourself by marrying me, you...” said Hélène,
Natásha, pale and stern, was sitting beside Márya Dmítrievna, and her
Anatole Kurágin whom he felt it necessary to encounter. On reaching
their way to destroy Moscow, they have outraged and are outraging me
Rostóvs’. It seemed to him that he ought to have an explanation with
Kutúzov’s and animated by different motives.



and stooped glass in hand over the infant.
Have received another letter about the Preussisch-Eylau battle
Before the end of the fast of St. Peter, Agraféna Ivánovna Belóva, a
cruelly and painfully to the end of his life. He seemed still to hear


under an obligation to him because when he was sent to make peace
were there.
The case, as represented by the offended parties, was that, after
guard for fear of binding himself in any way. To all questions put to

Rostóva’s abduction had been arranged and the preparations made by

Having unwound the string that tied the band on one leg, he carefully
unpleasant impression at first. The soldiers looked askance at him with
her, and immediately began to cry. The princess looked up at her. All
     Tender melancholy, ah, come to console me,
“What for? I don’t know. I must. Besides that I am going....” He
Dimmler—isn’t he good! I didn’t know him! And how he dances. Dear

“Go on, you must drink it all,” said Anatole, giving Pierre the last
Some of them were digging, others were wheeling barrowloads of earth
any definite color did not seem to trouble the blue-gray dog in the
assigned to cavalry-captain Denísov, the squadron commander, known
as she rose to go to her own room.
and triumph.
and one year later they all regarded him as an outlaw and a brigand.
morning till night and abstemious, so of course I am well.”

deed. They blamed Kutúzov and said that from the very beginning of the
ringing, deliberate voice. “I ask an opportunity to atone for my fault
agreed that this is a dinner for recreation, with not a word about
“That’s fine,” said he.
ask on my knees for your hand and your love!”
house and now managed all his affairs, stepped softly into the room.
presence.
“Let them pass, I tell you!” repeated Prince Andrew, compressing his

responsibility?”
“That’s Rostóva, the one who...”
all the same?” she thought, and did not reply.
“I have the honor to report, sir, that only eight rounds are left. Are
make out distinctly what was in that tent. The pitiful groans from all
“Yes, the ham was just delicious...” answered another with a loud
sometimes like a chip of wood whirling in the river, an hussar on foot,
“And this man too,” thought Pierre, looking into the face of the Chief
approaching. At the approach of danger there are always two voices that
Nicholas glanced at her and, wishing to appear not to notice her
who was rubbing him, slightly twitching and grunting. An aide-de-camp,


his cheerfulness was not infectious as it used to be: on the contrary it

hairy, red hands with their short fingers deftly turned the ramrod. His
with a much stronger enemy, and necessarily withdrawing the armies at
town—was one it was more flattering to be received in than any other.
his daughter whether she was enjoying herself. Natásha did not answer
dozed off. Alpátych made a slight movement.
release me!” thought he. Pressing his lips together he made that effort
being punished for my own and other men’s sins. But I have not killed
He was the same as ever, but the feverish color of his face, his
but by its mysterious significance: by the rapturous joy that lit up
sausage-shaped whiskers and showing under his square-set cap the hair

The younger Emperor could not restrain his wish to be present at the
but at irregular intervals, and grapeshot cracked and rattled onto the
insufficient, and he kept expecting something more, more and yet more.
“All right now. Come along! I wonder you’re not ashamed! If only you
themselves; I have already told them...”
other had been amputated above the knee. His neighbor on the other side,
Prince Andrew told his driver to stop, and asked a soldier in what

“And then, old fellow, he gives him one in the teeth with the butt
he would leave that night for the army at Mozháysk, and that his saddle
were thousands of inhabitants deceived into believing that Moscow would
the whole world without destroying the bonds of citizenship, and beside
“So this is what the Emperor is!” thought Pétya. “No, I can’t petition
compared to the lofty, equitable, and kindly sky which he had seen and
at some unknown period of time, only explains from a fresh side
“And how we’ve been begging, your honor,” said the old soldier,
do—perished of cold and hunger despite their captors’ desire to save
knew everyone in society, leaned over and spoke to her.

“And it must seem to you,” said Borís flushing slightly, but not
to the island of St. Helena. And the exile, separated from the beloved
“I desire peace, no less than the Emperor Alexander,” he began. “Have

Schlappanitz and the Thuerassa forest, avoiding the defiles of

his arm and really catching the tune.

The German laughed, came out of the cowshed, pulled off his cap, and

At dinner that day, on Dessalles’ mentioning that the French were said
Prince Andrew went up to the child and felt him. He was burning hot.
with all his being that the terrible blow into which he and all the
going on in front. Whether all the enemy forces were, as we supposed,
but resolute at the samovar—and questioned Pierre. The curly-headed,
not attract a moment’s attention to their own evolutions and did not
food.
can rush off alone in a carriage to Moscow, to Petersburg, to those
herself calmly and continuously as she had done before. As soon as she
“Papa, is it all right—I’ve invited some of the wounded into the house?”
Sidórych...” Simon did not finish, for on the still air he had
toward Anna Pávlovna, and Anna Pávlovna, with the same sad smile with
necessary money and warrants, and having sent some hussars on in
“À vos places!” * suddenly cried a voice.
“Smart, that!” said the esaul.
abstained from lifting my arm at the moment that has already passed? To
him where he had been. He replied. She again inquired whether
occurred to his regiment, but in reality he did not himself know what
familiar voice called him and a hand detained him.

his departure.
over a pole on the ground and had nearly fallen, coming his way. It was
Their theory, suitable for primitive and peaceful periods of history,

retired it’s because there’s work for them to do farther back.”
and he applied for advice to the holy brethren of the Society of Jesus,
the ground, proved quite useless. The mining of the Krémlin only helped
reading the letter. He went on tiptoe to the nursery door and opened it.
seemed to him valuable or useful. The aim of each man when he left
which he presented to Prince Bagratión. On the salver lay some verses
Persian rugs, bearskins, and weapons, sat Dólokhov in a traveling cloak
horror that had seized her when she touched him and convinced herself
hommes massacrés et l’armée de nos alliés détruite, et vous
features, gave him a rather comical expression. Bekleshëv and Theodore
outlines. Dressed as she used to be in Petersburg society, it was still


“And Mamma pressed her!” said Nicholas reproachfully.

a dark noncommissioned officer who was always shaggy, stood up to his
precedes a battle and had spent that happy day in inactivity, was all
Every army is composed of lower grades of the service—the rank and
dowry and take Mademoiselle Bourienne into the bargain. She’ll be the


of what they order occurs.
squadron liked him, had also a board in the roof at the farther end,

were moving in the same direction. Every soldier felt glad to know that

accustomed to do everything accurately and not just anyhow, and that he

“Yes and no mistake!” cried Denísov. “You worked like wegular
“Who the devil has put the logs on the road?” snarled he.
of the soldiers remain with the standards of their regiments, the others
with him. Pierre pushed his way into the middle of the group, listened,
infinite motion without a moment of rest and is unthinkable otherwise.
card game he was very fond of, was that of listener, especially when he
luck! Such ill luck. As soon as you left, it began and went on. Hullo

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
“Well, I think you must be sleepy,” said he, and began rapidly crossing
From that time, during all the rest of the Rostóvs’ journey, at every
Bourienne. I embrace you as I love you.
chief of which was a mysterious person he did not know, but who was
unchanging stonily severe expression; and, sitting down opposite the
Andrew, inquired whether his Serene Highness was putting up there and
even know if it would be a good thing (he even felt, he knew not why,
“What is the matter with you, my dear?” she said crossly to the maid

of it.
cabbage,” said Natásha, “and I remember that I dared not disbelieve
youth, we’ve had our fling and lived and reveled. Eh? And now, when
fighting Russian soldier without connections and intrigues, and to one
But Napoleon did not let him speak. He evidently wanted to do all the
to the carriages, the calèche, the phaeton, and back again.
up, he said: “I lay down and curled up, I get up and shake myself.” And
But even as he spoke he began to doubt whether this was the corporal
He stood by the balcony door looking at the crowd.

smeared with chalk—as white as flour! I suppose they polish him up as
it all?” and again listened to Denísov.
I should have been happy compared with what I am now. Now there is
infantry, and having reached the village of Gruntersdorf they halted. It
and the tumblers on it jumped about. “Telyánin! ‘What? So it’s
at the sentinel. “Je vous demande si le colonel est ici.” *
mane—which, though he saw other faces as well, he had not lost sight
“How? Standing or lying?”
he who says that an undermined hill weighing a million tons fell because
aches and shrinks at any external irritating touch.
he saw French cannon and French troops on the Pratzen Heights just where
The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
complain, and often mentioned that he had not been flogged once during
women had spread out their linen,” said one of the men, gazing with
was all over; but he said in an indifferent tone:
about the princess’ health and then led Pierre along a stone passage.
Denísov with his voice and mustache, and Telyánin and all that affair
and your capital!’ The one general whom we all loved, Schmidt, you
down with her foot under her on the bed that had been made up on the
in which he had given a detailed account of his meeting with Princess

countess went into the oratory and there Sónya found her on her knees
Glory, the good of society, love of a woman, the Fatherland itself—how
of the trees on the boulevard, the sounds of the band and the white
in his soul in connection with that tree. During this journey he, as
understand him it was so much the worse for them—did not go up to the
caught.
historical, and it seemed to him that it would now be best for him—whose
and information, and like Dokhtúrov he never made plans of battle but
glancing that way he noticed behind that door a plump, rosy, handsome
closed eyes. Then he opened them and whispered softly: “And the tea?”
eyebrows and looking uneasily and timidly at her.
from Sónya freed him from the knot that fettered him and from which
at three in the morning, but generally found her already awake. She was
ranks were returning from the attack. Rostóv got out of their way,
beside, and behind him. Pierre ran down the slope. “Where am I going?”
terribly near to this man. When she turned away she feared he might
A minute later Sónya came in with a frightened, guilty, and scared
the visitors, and before the visitors I tell you that in future you are
false. Thus an adjutant galloped up from Murat with tidings that
“Well, Prince, may God give you great luck!” said Matrëna in her gypsy
an invasion of Russia and never did so. Today he ordered such and such


“Ulyulyu!” cried Nicholas, in a voice not his own, and of its own
seemed to Princess Mary merely to offend her, shown special endearments
Dólokhov’s help.

at the soldiers as if threatening to punish them. Cadet Mirónov ducked

Rostóv’s rapid, firm steps and resolute, frowning face.
in the battle before Moscow, they cried “Vive l’Empereur!” just as they
Natásha looked at her inquiringly.
for the first time quite closely, with all its wrinkles and details,
“Nicholas, when did you break your cameo?” she asked to change the


moment. He made thousands of different conjectures as to where and
how badly the Note was worded,” remarked Count Rostopchín in the
even at home did nothing but play cards with his mother, pace silently

a new man. Where was his spleen, his contempt for life, his

with a rapid, almost brutal movement of her head, she intercepted his

“Yes,” answered Sónya softly.
They all plainly and certainly knew that they were criminals who must

From behind, where Karatáev had been sitting, came the sound of a shot.
young man was an illegitimate son of Count Bezúkhov, a well-known
superfluous steam to blow off when the pressure exceeds a certain limit.



“Well, Savélich, do you still not wish to accept your freedom?” Pierre

and because you yourself don’t love him.”
Karáy, tucked her tail yet further between her legs, and increased
to address him. (Borís understood that Arakchéev envied Balashëv and
not come and brought his pupil with him” (for some reason Prince
convey....”
to Princess Mary.

the more vexed she felt. Her letters to him, far from giving her any
certain marshal when approaching Moscow. He gazed at the calèches and
frost-bitten, and starving—and the column that had been presented to
But as a youth in love trembles, is unnerved, and dares not utter the
brought them together again, but after that they never spoke of the
thought Prince Andrew, not yet clearly grasping what he saw before him.
doppelkümmel. The officers gladly gathered round him, some on their
“What then? Eh?” repeated Anatole, sincerely perplexed by a thought

approaching the fire. As he was going along a footpath across a
“But Uncle Pierre! Oh, what a wonderful man he is! And my father? Oh,
The Russians did not make that effort because they were not attacking
victory over the French on the fourteenth of June, and the French,
“Sónya!... Nicholas!”... was all they said. They ran to the barn
continuing to converse, and Prince Andrew involuntarily heard these
from my father’s remarks and his talks with Michael Ivánovich I know
on his seat, lowered his hands, moved a little to the right and then to
with stewards, quarrels, and intrigues, its ties, society, and with
which he had entered. When the Rostóvs came to Petersburg Borís called
as it is,” she said to herself, and she began walking up and down the
not cure him of it.) Dessalles slept propped up on four pillows and his
“How she prayed!” he thought. “It was plain that her whole soul was in
I have had a long and instructive talk alone with Brother V., who
from him. She felt that her unity with her husband was not maintained
visibility is infinite, and cannot be imagined otherwise. (2) Time is
Rhetor, after a moment’s pause.
beyond the Vistula, and not ordered his troops to advance, there would
this defect was not due to any fault of the regimental commander, for
Vasíli the Beatified and under the Borovítski gate, back up the hill

Emperor quickly, his face suddenly flushing.

repeat them, but Platón could never recall what he had said a moment
conversation always related entirely to himself; he would remain calm
seen in the Austrian campaign, he had come to the conclusion that in
Gerásim opened one of the shutters and left the room on tiptoe. Pierre
I had a dream from which I awoke with a throbbing heart. I saw that

nothing to be happy about!” thought he.

“Oh, master, what are you saying?” exclaimed the horrified
you not to indulge in trifles now, but to help to pack, and tomorrow we
show a yellow instead of a green stain on baby’s napkin, and from whom
bwought some fwom the fields.”
Smolénsk—a calculation he had begun before the marshal went by. And he
he sought and did not find in himself the former tenderness for his son
with joy.


lost. Dólokhov “killed,” that is, beat, ten cards of Rostóv’s
Napoleon did not notice that in regard to his army he was playing
had meant.


the architect.
request that he would take no part in the matter, Rostóv agreed to be

wounded, but though his face was bleeding, he would not give up his

rubbish, larvae, and corpses, others back to the heap, or why they
The bottle of rum was brought. The window frame which prevented anyone

hinder their bliss. Love would conquer all. He would steal her away and

fire, “a plump man gets thin, but for a thin one it’s death. Take
Then a thin, pale soldier, his neck bandaged with a bloodstained leg
than to act “just anyhow.”
gleeful sarcasm he would remark, “There, I said the whole affair would
not only lightly but joyfully. And just at this time he obtained the

hoofs and wheels. Amid the general rumble, the groans and voices of the
On the fifteenth, when young Rostóv, in his dressing gown, looked out
we have thrown up three redoubts there, very strong ones. The left
from him, and Rostóv felt as in a dream that he continued to be carried
compromising her and committing himself, would now go boldly every day

suddenly struck up the air of As ‘twas growing dark last night—the

the women.”
But, as he had to say something, he began by asking her whether she was
In the total darkness the soldiers walked with Pierre to Mozháysk.
his cup away with his hand. “I’ll drive all his Württemberg, Baden, and
“Why this,” began Pierre, not sitting down but pacing the room,
glance, and then to her joys she saw that “Granddad” said something to
Túshin’s wattle shed was laid, with a bullet in his stomach, on
    CHAPTER II
“Colonel Michaud, do not forget what I say to you here, perhaps we may
“What brings you here?” cried the officers turning to the newcomer.

Rostóv and the assistant went into the dark corridor. The smell was so
it and the collective will of all the other animals is vested in that
was beginning to grow up which was stronger than principle, virtue,
Pfuel and saying, “Is it not so, your excellency?” But Pfuel, like a man
quiet voice:
latter looked in after supper, he pretended to be asleep, and early next
is betraying us! Russia alone must save Europe. Our gracious sovereign
only such man.”
me. I am used to suffering.”
such faith in Natásha seemed to Sónya terrible. “Well, anyway,”
that the story about Sergéy Kuzmích, the laughter, and the food
him expecting something to happen), all the personal desires and hopes

to say: “Ah, what have you done to me, and why?” And at the sight
The first time the young foreigner allowed himself to reproach her, she
hearts of the people. Having learned that there were many charitable
“I am sure it is Pierre. I will go and see,” said Countess Mary and left


indistinct shape in the corner, and mistook his knees raised under the
Bagratión’s hard brown face with its half-closed, dull, sleepy eyes.
“Rousseau’s Contrat Social,” said the vicomte with a tolerant

bit and I’ll get round him.... Listen! I’ll take your bet tomorrow,
Helena in the peaceful solitude where he said he intended to devote his
what follows from the fact that it is cold; and not that a child who
him unpleasantly, and the incessant laughter grated on him like a false
The husband came up and sullenly asked his wife what she was talking
In answer to Rostóv’s renewed questions, Denísov said, laughing,
After the French victory at Borodinó there was no general engagement nor
“I knew someone who received that sacrament seven times.”

“Whom have you come from? Who are you?”
used not to be, and which, as Nicholas soon found out, was due to the
The German closed his eyes, signifying that he did not understand.
to bear the looks turned upon her, ran away into the dancing hall,
away.
martyrdom as only Germans are, because only Germans are self-confident
dancing began in which Nicholas still further captivated the provincial
him to the nurse, and went with rapid steps toward the door. But at the
When she had completed the tour of the garden, which brought her
orders for the evacuation of Kalúga—a retreat beyond which town seemed
the post, waiting to be blindfolded like the others, and like a wounded

our enemies! Hurrah!” he exclaimed in his dashing, old, hussar’s
battle,” replied Márya Dmítrievna’s deep voice, which easily
wants to go to the war,” replied Pierre, addressing the princess
Taking his hand and drawing him downwards, Kutúzov offered his cheek to
quickly roused himself with a feeling of joy, as if learning afresh that

the spot indicated to him. He made no reply on his father’s favorite
we could not think how to address the reply! If not as ‘Consul’
gives a report quite contrary to what was said by the officer

and to Pierre, glancing at him again.
old, familiar acquaintance, “we are getting up a costume tournament;
immediately saw all the chief generals of the army together, and among
“But no, it can’t be!” he thought. “This stern, thin, pale face that
cruelty. Looking at his cold face, as he sat like a stern schoolmaster
comet of 1812—the comet which was said to portend all kinds of woes
was still living in Pierre’s house. The two younger ones had both
“Look! Yes, on my word, it’s Bezúkhov!” said Natásha, putting her head
Genoa and Lucca laying their petitions before Monsieur Buonaparte, and
“A visitor,” answered Antón.
The first person he saw in the house was Natásha. Even before he saw
blindfold.... Yes, our body is just a machine for living, that is all.”
through the frost-bound air.
honey fly timidly and shiftily. They do not sting, but crawl away from
“You mustn’t laugh, Miss,” said Dunyásha.


on his own judgment, but Dokhtúrov insisted that he must have Kutúzov’s
the night, dragoons mostly. I took down the name and rank of their


From the anteroom Berg ran with smooth though impatient steps into the
“and should not justify your confidence and the honor you have done

him, push him, do anything but kiss him—a thing everybody did. But

stroke, came up to the prince, bowing his bald head resignedly before
of this set.
unusual than what he was seeing. A skull, a coffin, the Gospel—it
It would be different if you grudged losing a laborer—that’s how I
Evening passed, night came, and the feeling of suspense and softening of
he thought, expecting every moment to meet the monarch, and conscious of
redoubt was only taken at the end of the battle by the cavalry (a thing
sensation of fear and respect which the old man inspired in all around
Moscow where there was to be fighting in a few days, and chiefly because
did not let him go. He sat down, sank into thought, closed his eyes, and
But for all that Willarski found it pleasanter now than it had been
“I’ll go,” said Sónya.
Among the gentlemen of the suite, Rostóv noticed Bolkónski, sitting
on it long. “Yes, it was a very brilliant ball,” and then... “Yes,
instructions. So it was decided to send a dispatch to the staff.
outstretched hind leg and her frightened choking head, with her ears
“It’s a long time since we met,” he said. “Thanks for coming.

and the defect of frankness in their opinions. They feared Napoleon,
“Granddad.” She was nearest to him and saw how his face puckered; he
answered.”
acquiring a trotter of his own, very stylish riding breeches of the
He said no more, but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by a
“Ah, my dear prince! I could not have a more welcome visitor,”
After dinner, he went to see his daughter-in-law. The little princess
a regiment. I cannot stand it here. Headquarters are so full of Germans
that.
Her first exploit, which cost her immense effort and established her
of the sanctuary screen. The priest came out with his purple velvet
most of all he liked to hear stories of real life. He would smile
trying to quiet him.
stimulatingly around him and his horse was so eager to go that he could
schools,” he went on, crooking a finger, “education and so forth;

Since Borís left Moscow in 1805 to join the army he had not seen the
Fédya, my dear count; that, believe me, is why I am so fond of you. Few
and blue riding breeches, who were swarming near the bridge, and then at
and that evening thanks to her agitation she was particularly pretty.
Mikháylovna returned to the Rostóvs’ and went to bed. On waking in

When they heard Napoleon’s proclamation offering them, as compensation


were constantly shaping themselves in his mind, arising from the

“It is of great importance to me,” she said, turning with a smile
question whether the camp was advantageous or disadvantageous remained
not yet been bandaged, took him, as a regimental commander, close up to
abandoning their belongings and proving by that negative action all

and taking Nesvítski’s arm he left Zherkóv, who did not know what to
his breast and a serene expression on his flat face. He spoke in that
trunk on the narrow footboard behind a carriage. “We must keep at least


Having run through different yards and side streets, Pierre got back
police, and looking round he noticed Alpátych.
“By the way, your excellency, I should inform you,” he
lingered for a moment.
clothes in which he had slept without undressing felt uncomfortable on
impatiently, “I came here not to wrangle with you, but to talk about
withstand an attack—knew there was only that moment and that if he let
England, and so on. History shows us that these justifications of the
old countess sighed as she looked at them; Sónya was always getting
from corporal punishment, and could not avoid expressing it by cries of
“Oh, how good! How splendid!” said he to himself when a cleanly laid

which it is difficult to justify.”
had on the Spásski Hill which might have been serious for her in her

cap and smoothing his hair wet with perspiration with his plump hand,
The sun had set long since. Bright stars shone out here and there in the


affairs, which they all agreed in approving, Prince Andrew began to

making his way out of the house through the brilliant suite when a
Balashëv, the Emperor repeated to him the words that he would not make

mother, if Borís happened to be mentioned, she spoke quite freely of
Berg as much as you please,” she finished quickly.
old fool who, without any reason, keeps his own daughter at a distance
neighbor? No! You have spent your life in idleness. Then you married, my
matters! I have confided in you....”
the Note.
position by each army, even what information was obtained could not be
it is past midnight—cannot now be altered,” said he. “You have

whoever he may be, exhort him who goeth astray, raise him that falleth,

It is easy now to understand the significance of these events—if only we

with a scent of autumn. Pierre and the adjutant dismounted and walked up
as it had done then. He recalled all the words spoken at that
Into the insignificant, trifling, and artificial interests uniting that
unnoticed cogwheels that, without clatter or noise, constitute the most
point. Ask Denísov whether it is not out of the question for a cadet to
“Stop it!” he exclaimed peremptorily. “There’s a fight, lads!” And,
condition that that person expresses the will of the whole people. That
face and searching beneath the eyebrows and mustache for his former and
the army to the other.

and did not raise it again till the heavy coach, rumbling, shaking and
Napoleon’s face as, shading his eyes with his hand, he looked at the
things into his mother’s language, “Prince Alexander Golítsyn has
They looked at one another (now that the hunt was over and they were in
Then Louis XVIII, who till then had been the laughingstock both of the
neither of them expected, reproached her niece for trying to catch
had a large estate in Orël province, and he occupied a temporary post in


please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate
at home about the preparations for their departure.
the ground, as a heavy fire had been opened on him and he was losing
to the story of the struggle between love and duty, Pierre saw before
sofa, cleaning himself with his tongue and teeth. Leading from the study


“Yes, I was a fool! I still believed in people, loved them, and
gaily.


look fixed on him on his right, and he turned. Close to the corner, on

thousand rubles for the forest.”

bear my cross. But if I forgive her for the sake of doing right, then



wounded; they know that. Look at the Lopukhíns opposite, they cleared

But however indubitable that conclusion and the officer’s conviction
Denísov called that part of the hut—and it was then so warm that the
Great and talking eagerly. As soon as they saw Pierre and his companion
accepted? Why was the battle of Borodinó fought? There was not the least
He hired the first cab he met and told the driver to go to the
and stopped in the doorway. The evening sky that had been so clear was
already visible. Suddenly something like a birch broom seemed to sweep

the darkness he took the boy’s hand and pressed it.
he would into that foggy distance: now something gleamed gray, now there
and more than forty borzois, so that, with the borzois on the leash
“Why, that must be the Anférovs,” said an old deacon, addressing a
After breakfast Napoleon in de Beausset’s presence dictated his order of
see the plumes?...” was whispered among the crowd.

joyful feeling he had not experienced before. It was a feeling akin
him with a shamefaced and angry look and hurried away. It was when
joy at the approach of the Emperors. One voice was heard shouting:
and old soldiers that the chief reason for the war was the necessity of
speaking to himself and bowing his head with a sad but firm expression.


professedly reject that conception but inevitably have recourse to it at

was serving, and a misunderstanding arose. The two commanders were much
campfire, thought it would be impossible to walk on them; but when
bedroom in his dressing gown, where he found his wife still at her
dry clothes without offending Mary Hendríkhovna’s modesty. They were
military exploits, as he himself had done when recounting them; besides

and battens, and led him into one of them. In the darkness some twenty
hadn’t interfered... Oh, my God! What is it all? What is it? Sónya,
involuntarily do on entering a large company and was in no hurry to
“What has Speránski to do with the army regulations?” asked Prince
“One can’t write so fast, your honor,” said the clerk, glancing
should not exchange. When my opponent has sixteen men and I have

All Moscow repeated Prince Dolgorúkov’s saying: “If you go on
adjutant galloped up with an assurance that the Russians would be routed
now at Pierre.


those he termed they), and he heard those people, Anatole and Dólokhov,
understood all the difficulties of the Russian army’s position, and
cynically Dólokhov had praised his wife’s beauty to him and from that
some question—“Most likely he is asking at what o’clock they
“No, I can’t agree with you! To live only so as not to do evil and
Natásha understood that) but simply because he thought it was all that

He felt himself nearer to it.

of the peoples it does not enter anyone’s head today to suppose that
Their conversation would probably have been different but for the effect
who had joined the young folk with a mildly condescending smile but now
Zherkóv touched his horse with the spurs; it pranced excitedly from
difficulty out of the front door.
“Then you do not think, like some others, that we must retreat?”

surrounding the church. From the words of his comrades who saw better
said the valet.

with his glistening wide-open eyes fixed upon him and his mustache
uniforms and at the streets and houses where the Russian and French
If many simultaneously and variously directed forces act on a given
And the count turned to the cook, who, with a shrewd and respectful

“Don’t! Don’t! What are you about?” whispered their frightened
courage shown in the Ostróvna affair, and in the same order the name
Count Rostopchín was unable to reply and, turning obediently, went in
carried out—we must part; so find some place for yourself....” But
“Thou hatest it. Then change it, purify thyself; and as thou art
during the night, but nothing was stolen; and as to the value of their
own way. A queer lot!”
about Pierre, it was only his unabashed, meditative concentration
“Natásha, Natásha!” came Countess Mary’s frightened whisper from the
The more the plundering by the French continued, the more both the
they assure the officer on duty that they, the marshals, are on
The old man made a departure from his usual routine in honor of his
had aroused and flew off after the hounds. The count, like a punished
Sokolnitz, November 30, 1805.”

On returning from a second inspection of the lines, Napoleon remarked:
an overcoat, sat an old, unshaven, gray-bearded soldier as thin as a

“Leave it to me,” said Princess Mary. “I know...”
uphill where the clay had been liquefied by the rain, past strips of

detached himself from earthly life. To love everything and everybody and
soldier after camp life. Despite his rapid journey and sleepless night,

of battles was evidently culminating in a panic.
German woman he had married in Poland. The doctor, whether from lack

and about which I shall know nothing. I shall not exist....”
Prince Andrew wished to leave at once, but Princess Mary persuaded him
it always seemed to him that the really heroic exploits were being
good as to look at the map and listen.” Langeron lifted his eyes with
Karatáev,” he added, evidently wishing to make it easier for Pierre to
for him, because, after his loss to Dólokhov (for which, in spite
The two bound men were led off to the master’s house. The two drunken
seen before, there was the same general expression of refined, inner,


They both sat silent, with an occasional glance at one another.
Yes, ‘I shall look forward very much to your return.’ Oh, how happy I
everything was bubbling with life in the ruined but reviving city.
But it then occurred to him for the first time that he certainly could
“Now, all together! But wait a moment, boys... With a song!”
He closed his eyes, and immediately a sound of cannonading, of musketry
and he experienced tenfold the joy of living, as he had not done since
outright.

returned from a long journey on which he had spent dozens of years, had
a few of them still move, rise, and feebly fly to settle on the enemy’s
got in with him. Makárin, Khvóstikov, and a valet seated themselves in
room, and looked round with a smile. She was, as always at evening
“Catiche has had tea served in the small drawing room,” said Prince
comfort so often, and fussed over him so much, that she overfed him and
advancing to the same heights as Morand’s and Gibrard’s divisions, which
Denísov, who was living luxuriously because the soldiers of his
was made for him, was approaching the icon.

warned her not to dare to let him see her. The fact that he did not, as

loading.
When campaigning, Rostóv allowed himself the indulgence of riding not
uniforms, with smartly dressed bandsmen in front mounted on black, roan,
cannon balls and bursting shells falling on the town. But these sounds
glittering ornaments, he rejoined his suite who were respectfully
are distributed. Why has fate given you two such splendid children?
“What’s the matter with you? Who are ‘they’? What do you want?”

pronounced the Mason in a stern and tremulous voice.
CHAPTER I

composed and printed in the hero’s honor. Bagratión, on seeing the
them curiosity, awe, and even love—a supercilious consciousness of
thought: “I am going to save the army.”
their theory that they lose sight of the theory’s object—its practical
Natásha looked in the mirrors and could not distinguish her reflection
should much like to be an adjutant and not remain at the front.”

had no friends: during this visit to Moscow she had been disappointed in
“Peter Kirílovich, come here! We have recognized you! This is
Like some huge many-limbed animal, the regiment began to prepare its
by the burning of Russian towns and the hatred of the foe this aroused
    * “I’m your man.”
Another smith tried to enter the doorway, pressing against the publican
to help feeling sad? Moscow—she’s the mother of cities. How can one see
and, raising his voice more and more, cried:
“However, you’re sleepy, and it’s time for me to sleep. Go back to

boundary of what they might not mention—brought before their minds with
Nicholas put all his horses to a gallop and passed Zakhár. The horses
“No, I have been transferred to the line,” said Anatole, hardly able
dependent on these two elements.
Moscow their house was always full of visitors. The night after the
“Matvévna,” the gun from which they had removed the dead officer.
seemed ready to lift its tail, jump down on its soft paws, and begin
Wintzingerodes! Stein, a traitor expelled from his own country;
of pride, indolence, and ignorance. Forgive me, my dear sir, but if I

to avoid obeying Sónya beckoned to Andrew to follow her quietly and went


would recognize them—were not at all shy, Pelagéya Danílovna hid
and he submitted to them.

tomorrow! Only let me tell you, I want to know my son-in-law better. You
are—at the heart of affairs and of the world—is the talk all of

and his face wore a strained look as if he found it difficult to master
in him.
If the realm of human knowledge were confined to abstract reasoning,
to inquiries as to where the prince lived, pointed out a small newly
“I think not,” he said, “and yet—yes. She does not deign to be



they also stepped on the raft.
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
would be better than the very best one trammeled by the presence and
above and below him in social standing. Something always drew him toward


of the divine. To love life is to love God. Harder and more blessed
government officials to his table, had unexpectedly selected Michael
decided to send the letters and money by the Grand Duke’s courier to
understand, made Natásha’s breast heave, and a joyous but oppressive
“Now then, Váska,” said Nicholas.

beginning of the action.) “I think I sent you?” he added, turning to
“You are the commander of the Emperor Alexander’s regiment of Horse
and spurs slightly jingling and his handsome perfumed head held high.
“Yes.”

tears of joy that filled his eyes, concentrated all his enthusiasm
and say, “I am so delighted... Mamma’s health... and Countess
“Glad to do our best, your ex’len-lency!” came a confused shout
I can’t...”
(Denísov’s servant who had remained with him) and his comrades who
it might happen,” he added with an involuntary smile.
Grand! Look at the smoke, the smoke!” exclaimed the artillerymen,
Princess Mary’s heart beat so violently at this news that she grew pale

“Tut, tut, tut! Tell that to others,” said the officer, waving his
dim-eyed, toothless, bald, sallow, and bloated, or gaunt and wrinkled,
amusing to give away dresses and ribbons to the maids, but when that was

only bivouacking here and have just come to look round. I am going back
his grave, even rather gloomy, look was instantaneously replaced by
heard, and out of the foggy darkness the figure of a sergeant of hussars

entered the room.
declaration to Princess Mary, he promised to go.
the cudgel was the Russian people; those who try to explain the matter
same way!” thought Natásha, feeling with horror a sense of repulsion
crime, which altered his whole life and were connected with Pierre, with
French though he spoke it badly, offered to conduct Prince Andrew.



in their shirt sleeves.
but his aim to consider, and he reached it. But tie yourself up with

you—Sónya. But their eyes met and said thou, and exchanged tender

obtain a post on the commander in chief’s staff. Berg and Borís,
speaking and evidently not thinking about her at all. Anatole was not
Mademoiselle Bourienne’s advice had allowed this doctor to visit him


dear invalid?” said she, as though unaware of the cold offensive look
his collar that had been wrenched loose with a bit of the cloth.
is the baby born?”
“How can you know? No, Mamma, don’t speak to him! What nonsense!”
handicraft, gardening, or anything else you please. But why intellectual
evidently not because he was shaven but because they had never grown.
his quarrel with his son, had harbored nasty suspicions of him, making
did not speak to Sónya who got up and went to her several times.

all pale and exchanged looks in silence.

and express his thoughts like that when awake.
Prince Michael Ilariónovich! (wrote the Emperor on the second of October

affected her very strongly. She was sure he would speak soft, tender
an orderly, or a townsman was carried through the waves of infantry;

giving orders that every messenger should be allowed to wake him up. In

Rostopchín’s orders to burn the barges and had in connection with that
Pierre stood with his arms hanging down and legs apart, before his
beautiful, expressionless face. Amid the scattered property and the


room. Perhaps he came yesterday and I have forgotten it.” She rose,
remained at home.
puzzled tone.
“They’ll cweep up to the garden; you’ll wide up fwom there with the
‘faithful slave,’ as you call yourself! But how do you do? I see I
into the ballroom where, shyly at first and then more and more merrily
a domestic serf, about forty-five years old, with grizzled hair and a
tapped with his stick. Some latecomers took their seats in the stalls,
young and old men and women Pierre could not understand why he did not
what there is in you.”
the next night. More than once he had enabled Dólokhov to escape when
was ready to accept it; but some secret feeling of repulsion for her,
abandoned Moscow to the enemy.
Borís, who had come to Moscow on leave a few days before, had been

would you now like to look round my place?”
always closely followed by Ilyín, rode along the side of the road

stir, and a footman who had run in announced, with a frightened face:
it.
the sinews and scorching the flesh of his sprained arm and shoulder. To
He thought too of the possibility (which he feared most of all) that

the demand was booked against an infantry regiment, there will be a row

treated them with absent-minded contempt.


say.


tones in which she had been wont to sing, and listened attentively to

and now, to get rid of them, handed over to them a man to be killed
Then he recalled the coarseness and bluntness of her thoughts and the

keen interest in the whole affair. You know she is very gracious to
and placed an iron pot on it into which they broke some dried bread and
reproachful envious eyes that were fixed upon him, and went out of the


that evening to bid a last farewell to the celebrated grandee of
and could get nothing done. He kept criticizing his own work, as he
his eyes. “Can they be French?” He looked at the approaching
he... he... he said he was wishing for it at the very moment I entered
not been committed much that resulted from it—good, agreeable, and even

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm

and look for a profound meaning in it of which she herself had no
previous wars. She did not realize the significance of this war, though


remain here, while I myself go away leaving them to the mercy of the

clothes, another boots, and a third bread. Pierre sobbed as he sat
“The Emperor? He is generosity, mercy, justice, order, genius—that’s
a moment to Natásha’s sleigh and stood on its wing.

French and saw Tíkhon and learned that there would certainly be an

a reply unnecessary. She smilingly waited. All the time the story was


Fine! I don’t want anything, Prince.”

Then he remained silent for a while, and all at once looked cheerfully
please!”
roused, had begun to talk, and wanted to express what had brought him to
“How sweet she is—she will be a weal beauty!” said Denísov.
“They’re dying of hunger,” said Dron. “It’s not a case of carting.”
invitation to Anna Pávlovna’s reception and had sat listening to
possessed of a Helen. “But no doubt it always is and must be so!”
“But why go to Petersburg?” Natásha suddenly asked, and hastily replied
“If only I knew that anything besides humiliation would come of
involuntarily rested longer on the slim Natásha. She looked at her
“Very well, very well!... Oh, what a fellow you are!”
There was no one in the passage. He went along the whole length of this

“Go on, go on!” said the major.
account of court and personal considerations tens of thousands of lives,

how our troops are distinguishing themselves. It certainly does them


“No, he is a Freemason, I have found out. He is fine, dark-blue and
the ribs and telling him to hold his hand up. Soldiers scattered over
But on Tuesday evening, having come to Hélène’s splendid salon,
finding out.... Only do let me into the very... into the chief... I
“Not bound to endure insults,” Dólokhov concluded in loud, ringing
“Andrew!” said Princess Mary, imploringly. “Il faut que vous
in the present case it is similarly necessary to renounce a freedom
horror of death, through privation, and through what he recognized in
addressed the obstinately taciturn Rostóv, saying that the latter had
capital one from our sutler! He has splendid things. And he’s very
“There are so many prisoners today, nearly the whole Russian army,

has beaten the Germans. They beat no one—except one another. He made
“Go across to our hosts: they invited you,” added Borís.
soul I loved in her... loved so strongly and happily...” and suddenly
ball in fact, at which he had had the well-remembered pleasure of seeing
“Well, sit down, sit down here. Let’s have a talk,” said Kutúzov. “It’s
that time of autumn. The Sparrow Hills were visible in the distance,
a war in the personal activity of a single man. Whenever I look at my

found words he had long been seeking.
satchels, sabretaches, open portmanteaus, and dirty boots. Two freshly

them, and feeling all the strength of her love for them. When they

that not even a continuity of most brilliant successes would secure
brightly lit up by the blaze, he felt a painful prick at his heart. His


she began to smile and talk. He asked about mutual acquaintances, and

evidently expecting him to bow or to step out of his way. Prince Andrew
but opened them again on hearing the bedstead creak. The countess was
help in that difficulty.

a madman’s cunning, Makár Alexéevich eyed the Frenchman, raised his
commander—as equivalent to the sum of many individual wills; whereas the
at her timidly over his spectacles, and like a hare surrounded by hounds
“Yes,” returned Pierre with a smile, “and this young man now
“I don’t know why you think I am cross,” said Nicholas, replying to the
millions in hand might smile at a poor fellow who told him that he, poor
mind easy,” said he in abrupt sentences while sealing his letter.
A rustle of starched petticoats and the whispering and laughter of
on!” innumerable voices suddenly shouted after the ball had struck

to the right nor to the left but along the old—the worst—road, through
their shoulders and checking the peasants, who were walking unevenly and
to the watchhouse. In the twilight saddled horses could be seen, and
the voice Natásha had known previously, but the one that had sung As
battle. Pierre saw that there was a bridge in front of him and that
stood just behind the priest’s back, and without crossing himself (he

“It’s no joke, you know! It’s all very well if you’re single. ‘One man
crowd, they had got wedged in at the approach to the dam and, jammed in
hour. Suddenly the broad muscles and lines of the count’s face began
asked permission to be present at the battle out of curiosity. The

her sitting room, from which those who were there immediately withdrew

Bolkónski, turning still paler, pushed him away with an angry look and
good-natured, sincere, and animated levity. “But you see... another

choking him. When he saw Natásha he waved his arms despairingly and
of War; Count Bennigsen, the senior general in rank; the Grand Duke
side of the Kolochá to the left of the highroad, Napoleon shifted the

connected with him, or ever to have attributed importance to what

left the room.
pieces.
could hear. “I thank you all! God be praised!” and he rode past that


galloping back. Rostóv, picking out one on a gray horse, dashed after
horror and fear. All were still. Pierre took his hands from his eyes.
he saw turrets and a church. What need to hurry? What was he now to say
CHAPTER IX
Count Rostopchín suddenly grew pale as he had done when the crowd closed
watched her cousin who was going to join the army, with such passionate
unshakable. We pass the time as we can, but in war as in war! The
CHAPTER XI

familiarity that grows up between a nurse and her mistress.

becoming more distant.
superiority over his sister), Natásha gave him a wink, and neither

they afraid of sinning?...” said the same mob now, looking with pained
moment in which the first movement was made is irrevocable, and at that

Prince Andrew was standing before her, saying something to her with a

to explain his condition to himself he lay down and fell asleep at once.
Natásha where she was to stand—a spot where nothing could possibly
rubles a year? And,” he went on after a pause, “what will it be in
where she was going and with whom. Having fallen into the line of

the duty that now bound him to her forever. The present feeling, though
“No, I shan’t have such luck,” thought Rostóv, “yet what
loudly and, catching her breath more and more quickly, began to sob.

that she understood, and this seemed to make her love for him still

It seemed so natural to Pierre that everyone should like him, and it
intruder to go.

total of his losses on it, then he looked round for aid from the other
“How is it,” she began, as usual in French, settling down briskly

gentle daughter and the pretty Frenchwoman who were reverently devoted
the faces of the people crowding at the crossroads. Black figures
meaning, for this force is understood by them all not only differently
the present! Quicker, quicker—and that they should leave me in peace!”

on in front.
estate near Moscow had inevitably to be sold, and for this they had to
to extinguish the fire, to prevent looting, and to reassure the

over beamed with irrepressible delight.) “It’s in the Emperor’s
“God be thanked that you are in time,” said she to one of the

in, and settled up with the innkeeper. The noise of wheels, hoofs, and
indignantly. “I come to ask you what to do, and you call it


“What is that?” asked the countess as if she did not know what the
mildness.... And the feeling of enthusiasm and love for his sovereign
certain or at least probable, Rostopchín instead of exciting the people
his first impulse stepped instantly and rapidly toward the coach. But
surrounded by pages, aides-de-camp, and an escort, along the road to

next day to allow time for the relay horses to be sent on in advance.


a blue headdress, who had just finished her game of cards with the most

wasn’t it?”
adjutant whom he so hated.
their belongings, did so from the latent patriotism which expresses

“But we have grain belonging to my brother?” she said.
possible only when men abandoned the conception of the fixity of the
herself Anna Makárovna used to knit at the same time on the same
an inexhaustible number of pretty young women, married and unmarried,

acquaintance,” said Pierre. And again, glancing at the stranger’s
happening in the world. Little Nicholas alone had changed. He had grown,
as he did now and that only now did he understand and know what life
know how to express it ... not by a balance of political power....”
in the world and above everything in the world. “What were losses, and
Whenever an event occurs a man appears or men appear, by whose will the


drummer, their leader, turned round facing the singers, and flourishing
The cause of the destruction of the French army in 1812 is clear to us
cart, shouting and scolding a soldier with coarse abuse. In each of
the wonderfully clear air, brightly illuminated by slanting morning
ashamed.

forever, forever!” she pleaded.
uncomfortable and in great pain. The doctor and valet lifted the cloak



feel it. Apart from the advantage he derived from Anatole, the very
considering nothing wrong that one does but in priding oneself on every
so. Nicholas was in such good spirits that this merely amused him.
who finds that the apple falls because the cellular tissue decays and so
day before, he wished to do what the young man wanted. Having been sent
been a vagrant and had done nothing. So they asked the old man: ‘What
I love so that I would give my life for them, and the others I’d

moved forward.
here too at the governor’s party there were (as it seemed to Nicholas)
and had taken him to Vienna and given him the more serious commissions.


honest is crushed! Everyone sees that this cannot go on. Everything is


continually receiving many petitioners one after another.
of events and that Moscow was in effect already abandoned. The other
head and lips indicating very little hope for the patient.
that was smoldering in the morning light, stopped suddenly, and Pétya
profoundly.
adjutants met him with news of the successful result of the action.
When everybody rose to go, Hélène who had spoken very little all
yard.
“Now then, all together—shove!” cried the voices, and the huge surface
cavalry, unnecessary baggage, and artillery material that is no longer
men. He talked boldly and naturally, and Natásha was strangely and
frowned—partly from an increased pain in his head and partly at the
a schoolboy on holiday. Everyone—the stagecoach driver, the post-house

in the woods; finally, in its march from Moscow to the Oder the Russian
As soon as the Uhlans descended the hill, the hussars were ordered up
“Ah, it’s you? Very glad, very glad to see you,” he said, however,
had a double meaning.
he could attain it, it would be the end of all things. Everything ended
She would begin to say something to her in a low tone from the other end
we watch the ants round their ruined heap, the tenacity, energy, and
needs, and the meaning of which the very man who wrote it does not
whether it was cheaper to live in Moscow or Odessa. Natásha sat down,

obediently and was about to go but at that instant there came into
the serious business which, he considered, awaited him next day. He
“My dear!” exclaimed his mother imploringly, again laying her hand
about, till the boards were withdrawn from under him and he disappeared
his eyes.
Prechístenka Boulevard, surrounded and sprinkled on all sides by stars
“Natásha, what are you about? Come here!” said the countess.

“In Kolyázin, master, a wonderful blessing has been revealed.”
his brows. “Prince Theodore and all those. To encourage culture and
His health had to be bad for his place to be taken away and given to
could ever enter his head. It now seemed clear to him that all his
took possession of him, and all the unlucky accidents that might destroy
“Princess, it’s God’s will! You must be prepared for everything,” said
round with much animation and cheerfully nodded to his son as the latter
it.”
inexplicable (unless he wished to show that he, too, could have an
asked to play on the clavichord. Anatole, laughing and in high spirits,
he tried hard to give the old energy and fire, but which sounded like
she had been unable to close her eyes on account of his moaning, and at
“It is a very suitable spot,” said the esaul.

Cossack passed by at a sharp trot.

“You brute, you murderer!” screamed a thin, pale woman who, with a baby

had that day been transferred.

other details of life ordered by the doctors, the carrying out of which
To the men who fought against the rising truths of physical philosophy,


incomprehensible why he should be King of Naples, he was called so,
in the crowd was turned to her; evidently they were all trying to avoid

Alexéevich. This is what he noted in his diary:
And indeed everybody in the room looked with a smile of pleasure at the
“Natásha,” he said, “you know that I love you, but....”
helping their parents, were generally a nuisance and a hindrance to
the court of the Dowager Empress, who was a friend and relation of the
eyes had uttered French phrases between his teeth. Every muscle of his
of some precious stone, sparkled in the moonlight. A tree in the garden
beams of mild and majestic light around, and already he felt himself
“Yes, Mamma, I tell you sincerely that these are hard and sad times for
and warmly pressing his hand looked affectionately over his spectacles


arrival in Petersburg he received only his due. I always wonder at the








“Forgive me for what I ha-ve do-ne!” faltered Natásha in a scarcely
so that the maid could hardly get her hair plaited, and she was
His face shone with self-satisfaction and pleasure.



“You...! you... scoundrel! I challenge you!” he ejaculated, and,
domain of smoke that overlay the whole space in front, quick hissing
with his daughter, Princess Mary, and her companion, Mademoiselle
Though some skeptics smiled when told of Berg’s merits, it could not
confession, communion was administered to the dying man, preparations
was already full of people. There were people not only in the square,
Denísov was shown to the room prepared for him, and the Rostóvs all

listening to the gypsies and other singers.



“You owe forty-three thousand, Count,” said Dólokhov, and

seemed to him all the interests that engrossed Napoleon, so mean did his
almshouse and the lunatic asylum, could be seen some people in white
policy of their court; that I love and respect Alexander and that in
of all things human came to him oftener than before. At the same time
exists between the expression of someone’s will and the execution of
wanderings from one saint’s shrine to another, free from envy, earthly
conscripted for the army.
Though the source of M. Michaud’s chagrin must have been different from

Andrew.
convenient opportunity to detach themselves and to surrender on the

Mounting the steps to the knoll Pierre looked at the scene before him,

“Oh, gracious me, a man beaten to death—killed!...” screamed a woman
of logic must admit that conclusion, and in spite of their lyrical

Russians from Krems to Znaim.

beyond ceremonies and meaningless prayers and are now instructed in
higher grades of the army, and so on to the apex, the point of which
unimportant matters; he admired her shy grace. In the middle of the
still in a whisper though the music had ceased. “But I am certain that
when it seemed that the incomprehensible was revealing itself to her a
wear military uniforms, and he who kills most people receives the
of the room, and then, leaving “God’s folk” to finish their tea,
close to her; the red patches on her face came and went, and it was

and the reading of the letter began. After a brief description of
“And who has told you what is bad for another man?” he asked.
words, to describe directly the life of humanity or even of a single
his father about something, and Princess Mary noticed that before his
again he flushed. “I give you my word of honor it shan’t occur again,
pagodes chinoises, * this Moscow gave Napoleon’s imagination no rest.

chances—from among all the seething French parties, and without joining
sat up and began wiping her eyes and explaining.
so rapid that they could hardly be his mother’s.
“Yes, to them it must seem sad!” he thought. “But how simple it is.
their places for the polonaise.

will is not withdrawn from certain rulers and their heirs, and
“He’s come!” she exclaimed as she ran past, and Denísov felt that he too
     * God has given it to me, let him who touches it beware!
Amid the turmoil of his activities and distractions, however, Pierre at
“No, nothing.”
    * “My child! I love you and have known you a long time.”

any event that however it may end there will always be people to say:
Pierre was just the husband needed for a brilliant society woman. He was
and curly blue-black hair, wearing a red shawl, ran out with a sable
An awkward silence followed these words. Natásha was the first to speak,

everywhere. We have an excellent priest, he conducts the service

‘Make me whole,’ says he, ‘and I’ll give thee what the Tsar
“No, I went to look at the fire, and they arrested me there, and tried
French to throng to the place that had formerly been Moscow. But when
shoulders, turned out his toes, tapped gently with his foot, and, by
business. I am old. I...”
obvious falsehood, and that Balashëv still stood silently before him in
The latter in Pierre’s presence had ceased to be caustic, and his face
did it purposely when she was there) the old prince kissed Mademoiselle
Rostóv’s eyes with the same veiled look. Each time this happened


injure you in the eyes of other young men who visit us, and above all
away when she saw him, and to her too he was not the Nicholas she had
“On the contrary, things seem satisfactory, ma cousine,” said Pierre
feeling that he had reached the limit beyond which censure was
the Lord!”
calling on them as old acquaintances and benefactors of the monastery.
forgotten for which servants were sent back, that they had decided to

own about the facts he was recounting. For some time he engrossed the
He had just remembered his recent encounter with the doctor’s wife and
a child and can shift without him, but it’s not nice to enter a family

presence with his whole being by the loss of his sense of freedom. She
gentleness and affection. He could not refuse the post, or rather the
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium

The Emperor, frowning slightly, bent his ear forward as if he had not
information received of the movements of the French was never reliable.

serfs to the Three Hills quarter of Moscow to fight Napoleon, and that
After the first feeling of perplexity aroused in the parents by Berg’s

question. Time has gone by which I could not detain, the arm I then


“Well then, till tomorrow at Sokólniki,” said Dólokhov, as he took

by a movement of peoples from west to east. Several times it moves
Pierre took one of the glasses and emptied it. Ramballe emptied his too,

vehicles packed with china that had been captured from him at Borísov
scrutinizing Anatole closely and intently.
tell a long story.
“Everybody always has liked me, and I am so willing to do anything
opened the bedroom door.
Vorónezh.

Boguchárovo, replied that they had left on the seventh and again went

“I know the will was made, but I also know that it is invalid;
It was a war for a great cause, the end of uncertainties and the

‘our Sovereign, the Emperor,’ as they say at official dinners,”
brothers more worthy than he would test him and that Pierre had only to
fingers. “The sniveling Anna Mikháylovna? That’s two. She’s here
room to write to his father, to whom he wrote every day. In the corridor
CHAPTER XXIV
trifle to let a wagon go past. After he had gone, two soldiers rushed to
the cause of which Pierre so well understood.

old age and tobacco, which she had known so long. “Now, madam, these
the water could flow to waste. Pierre felt, moreover, what the accused
breaks that handle off, as Buckle did, without finding some other method
inquiring what she was to do with these people. On leaving them, Anna
the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
men who very soon became frequent visitors at the Rostóvs’ house in

be their last hope and that if Nicholas refused the match she had found
only suppositions, which seemed important to the younger men but not to
understood without naming.
it.
reaction. All the well-known people of that period, from Alexander and
of age, whom Pierre had formerly met at the gypsies’ and knew as a bad
“But if you won’t accept money from me like a comrade, you will
so readily as they did hers. “What can I do, where can I go?”
punishment suddenly changed.
sent an ordinary man to Siberia. They often called Balagá into their
and distinguished from everyone else in the world. Napoleon merely laid
with a pair of sleek roans, exactly like those of a certain prince. He

cannon, and a stick called a “marshal’s staff,” and disputed as to who
The captain was so naïvely and good-humoredly gay, so real, and so
would make an exemplary wife and mother.
despair at failing in a Scripture examination, his borrowing money from
gasping men.

“Well, Papa, I tell you definitely, and Mamma too, it’s as you please,
listened attentively. His favorite occupation when not playing boston, a

return his smile when saying good-by, if I was able to let it come to
a while, she suddenly hears someone coming... a sleigh drives up with
right. Selfish, vain, stupid, trivial in everything—that’s what
could not scream like that—came from the bedroom. Prince Andrew ran to

Pierre’s subjection consisted in the fact that he not only dared not

said: ‘What they have brought us to!’ and had a sob in it when he said

which not one battle had been won, and in which not a flag, or cannon,
“Att-ention!” shouted the regimental commander in a soul-shaking
They consisted of a box for cards, of splendid workmanship, a
“Good-by, dear niece,” his voice called out of the darkness—not
reason to shut yourself up. Even if you are engaged, I am sure your
“But in what position are we going to attack him? I have been at the
“Ulyulyulyu! ulyulyu!...” he cried. When he caught sight of the
being revealed, and were designed only to form a channel through which
when the youthful Speránski was at the zenith of his fame and his
“Russia is done for!” he cried. “Alpátych, I’ll set the place on fire
Austrian adjutant, Bilíbin, and last night’s conversation. Having
him for those words, bullets flew hissing across the regiment and across
concerned with, or he wanted to give the Russian special messenger that
“She will go to the country.”
the sun so bright, everything around so gay, but that slim pretty girl
vile, infamous paper, but I thought the thing was invalid.”
The Emperor turned with a smile to one of his followers and made a
talking sense. Come here, come here!”
Old Karáy had turned his head and was angrily searching for fleas,
   And on the throne our Titus shield.
there it was. And what seemed still more terrible to her was that since
the point of tears and sympathized with his wounded pride, and the more
again, and let his head sink still lower.
and no connections. Yet, though Anatole spent tens of thousands of
tenderness and emotion with which her heart was overflowing, but without
salt of mirth, and they were not even aware that such a thing existed.
Kutúzov, without looking at Wolzogen, gave directions for the order to
On the third day after Christmas Nicholas dined at home, a thing he had
“Yes, yes, at thunderclaps!” was repeated approvingly in the back rows
days after the delivery of his speech at the lodge he lay on a sofa at
once noticed that her mistress leaned out of the window and smiled at

Andrew accentuated his gloom by the contrast between his own position
legs jerked rapidly though his head was quite motionless. A bullet had
agreement being the simplest way to avoid discussions that could lead to



Napoleon and Alexander were called, was such that when Napoleon declared
symptoms of the approach of the end.
now?” This question suddenly presented itself to her, and in answer she
closed his eyes. One of his suite beckoned to the soldiers carrying
in her thin shoes.
marching with particular grace and boldness in time to the song and

weren’t in the study. We began disputing—Pierre and I—and I lost my

clean shirts.”
meaning of that word. It is only to prevent some Pugachëv or other from
“Another Ismail comrade,” said he. “A brave officer! Are you
“And such a one!” she said. But as soon as she had said it a new
chief informing him that he had resolved to remain at Bald Hills to the
the balaláyka to the air of My Lady, with trills and variations.

recognized.
regiment was much surprised at the commander in chief’s order to throw
WAR AND PEACE
a cloak, waiting for the conversation to finish. They listened to
them, as well as a new dress of her own made of “metallic gauze,”

everyone’s situation. Tout comprendre, c’est tout pardonner. * Think
Sónya trembled all over and blushed to her ears and behind them and
of Illuminism, * met it with a coldness that surprised Pierre. The Grand
frequently on the battery and spent bullets buzzed and whistled around.
Mary Hendríkhovna was the wife of the regimental doctor, a pretty young
Andrew.
He planned another garden and began a new building for the domestic
“What are they about?” thought Prince Andrew as he gazed at them.
the wedding Berg entered the count’s study early one morning and, with
passions; but we must strive to direct them to a noble aim, and it is
retained; but without refuting them it would seem impossible to continue

the new force they have devised does not account for what happens in
which she had to reply; the room in which little Nicholas had been put
door. “Papa wants to sleep.”
his groom to get the horses ready and to call him early in the morning,
to the frontier. Our dear Emperor has left Petersburg and it is thought
ascertain the position of affairs.

countenances became calm; soldiers and officers greeted him gaily, grew
even asking himself what they were wanted for—he procured a coachman’s

and the curtain rose.
the fact that Pierre was very rich, had two mansions in Moscow, and that
smash something. Pushing away the footmen he tugged at the frame, but
man’s life in which the union of these two contradictions has already
he approaches for the thousandth time the action that always ends in the
“Shall I join the army and enter the service, or wait?” he asked himself
public interest from being felt or even noticed. Most of the people at
lying on piles at the end opposite the entrance, to serve as a table. On
the little girl with his white hand and kissed her. And that gesture,
for Mademoiselle Bourienne and went with her to the drawing room.
“Why terrible?” asked Nicholas. “No, Váska is a splendid
Nesvítski with a laugh threw his arms round Prince Andrew, but
Toll wrote a disposition: “The first column will march to so and so,”
Count Markóv, and Prince Vyázemski—did not show themselves at the
“How light it is, Nicholas!” came Sónya’s voice.
How horrified he would have been seven years before, when he first
to be found out at any moment. But whether because stupidity was just
labor is as essential to him, as much a condition of his existence, as
and inapt but she attained her object. The conversation was resumed, and
surprise Pierre, for she had become even handsomer than before. What did

have waited eighteen months for explanations. But in order to begin
That smile was immediately reflected on Pierre’s face.
of them were punished, some sent to Siberia, many died of cold and
The director of her conscience was astounded at having the case
and Minnesingers, but the history of the life of the peoples and their

Prince Andrew had arrived in the evening and Pierre came to see him next
judges,” he replied, thinking that he was repeating what he had said
not go to any large gatherings, but only to small receptions. Prince
In contrast with the dread felt by the infantrymen placed in support,
up, first blue and then red, Shcherbínin lit the tallow candle, from
“There’s nothing to be gay about,” answered Bolkónski.
carriage?” he asked his mother with a smile.
intended to show that, as a highly trained military man, he left it to
come and sit with you at supper. We’ll have another dispute. Make


tonight to my friends—come to the English Hotel.

“Gone away,” said Ermólov’s orderly.
considered him a criminal, and a year later they executed those who
place in history and without which we cannot imagine the modern history

so that it appears to confirm what they desire, and he knew how readily
here? Why was I so reluctant to part with life? There was something in
was dead—and Tíkhon reminded him that she was no more, and he shouted,
prince again began speaking about his son, about the war, and about the
hall all sat waiting, silently and alert. In the outlying serfs’



as calm and aloof as his look.
and that the richest peasants (who formed the deputation) had begun
who held her up.
by the clatter of knives and forks, the voices of visitors, and the
In quiet and untroubled times it seems to every administrator that it
Masonic statutes, “be kindly and courteous,” recurred to him. He

hearing those words I said good-by to the holy folk and went.”
soldiers, who moved that they might hear better what he was going to
    * Denísov.
“Yes, and you remember how Papa in his blue overcoat fired a gun in
Frenchwoman blushed and went away without a word. When he reached his
legs that were already spreading apart. Then they dressed him in uniform
weighs on him increases.
Natásha no less proud of her first long dress and of being at a real
guilty you are. You know that yourself. But when your father comes back
Farther and farther he rode away, stopping at other regiments, till at

retreating forces.
in space. Every human action is inevitably conditioned by what surrounds
get Nicholas back and wished to go herself to join Pétya, or to get
the senator, but thought it necessary on this occasion to address him
saw friendly looks and heard friendly words. Yesterday’s adjutant
stamp of inconsolable grief, replied: “Yes, Princess” to all Princess
while dressing, and yet the question he was always putting off demanded
will be my teacher...” And lowering his big arm he offered it to the

of the last few days rose one after another in his imagination,
face which had already gone white.
unharnessed cart where there was nobody. Tucking his legs under him and
me, my dear boy, there is nothing stronger than those two: patience and

two front teeth were missing that had been knocked out by the butt end
excuses now! It’s your turn to sing the ba’cawolla—I entweat

in French. “They are like wolves whom nothing but flesh can appease.”
The prince was surprised that so simple an idea had not occurred to him,
be dozing. His head sank forward and then he roused himself.
Nesvítski’s and Dólokhov’s sabers, which were stuck into the

“but I remember putting it there.”
away from my father, as I wanted to. Or I might have been sent to serve
commander in chief. Bagratión knew that as the distance between the two
acknowledged that the theorists are often one-sided, and therefore one
this new sorrow brought them still closer to one another. Princess Mary
order not to lose his head and do foolish things he must not act on his
highest aristocracy, to an ambassador’s ball he had attended, and to
(having occupied Borodinó) were attacking in the first phase of the

his legs almost gave way, it seemed to him that he was tired out. He
in the fact that the commonest events—sometimes just such as Pierre
a few fir trees.
very clever but eccentric, and a bore. The poor girl is very unhappy.
together? And there! Bezúkhov got off scotfree, while Fédya had to


receive the guests and the visitors.
“but you have used such words to me—‘mean’ and so on—which as a man of
his head and wearing a shabby blue cassock—probably a church clerk and


the count have borne his dearly loved daughter’s illness had he not



which were uppermost in his mind at that moment, addressed Prince Andrew
doubled. To this Prince Andrew answered with a smile that he could

“Yes, but what luck for Lázarev! Twelve hundred francs’ pension for
“Where are you going to now, my dear sir?”
Moscow society in 1812. Those who had quitted Moscow already in July
what she needed. While attending to him she bore the anxiety about her

through you and three yards into the ground under you,” he continued,
not visible at all. All that struck the eye was a strong, handsome, and
Everyone again looked toward the door, which creaked as the second
flowers and carry it to the hive, says that it exists to gather honey.
handle, let it go again, and went to the window from which he had a
“Ask the countess, I don’t give orders.”
adjutant.
approached, as if the hounds in full cry and Daniel ulyulyuing were just
Borís understood that this was meant for him and, closing his eyes,
suffering, but what he wanted to do was too terrible.
bottle!” he shouted.
tones.

all struggled and suffered and tormented one another and injured their

hero and commander was following quite a different train of thought.

by the Nikúlins’!”
“I give you that column, lads,” he said, riding up to the troops and


on the horizon turned away from the hare, and the whips, but not the
betraying by this desperate and provocative proposition his extreme

had done in Petersburg at Anna Schérer’s reception.
“You have only lately arrived?” the countess asked him.
backward did not improve or alter the position of the troops. All
“Vienna considers the bases of the proposed treaty so unattainable
already prevails in consequence of its activity. The government has
The man answered the question.
beringed fingers. “Tell me, as you would a sister, what I ought to do.
anything, but wait for what was bound to come to pass.
Coming out onto the highroad the French fled with surprising energy
once for a moment of glory, of triumph over men, of love from men I
steps. “O God,” he said with tears in his eyes, “how could you do
in my brother’s name,” said she.
drenched, whose trousers had worked up to above his knees. Behind him,
sitting.
But in spite of all this, the soldiers of Denísov’s squadron fed
But Napoleon with his long experience of war well knew the meaning of
through the door. Prince Andrew got up, went to the door, and tried to
“Come in, come in!” he repeated in a gentle whisper. “Oh, what can I do
During the whole of that entr’acte Kurágin stood with Dólokhov
bringing him a letter from Kutúzov. This letter requested the count to
the intellectual lights of Petersburg were gathered there and, like a
there.
hands; the ammunition wagons he had been approaching no longer existed,
regimental commander cooling down a little. “Leave indeed.... One says
“Oh, so that is Vereshchágin!” said Pierre, looking at the firm, calm
alter his life or introduce anything new into it, when his own life

there was generally a drinking bout, finishing with visits of a kind
that God who has been sewn into this amulet by Mary! There is nothing
Nicholas and for ingratitude. Sónya listened silently with downcast

to the views of the old generals Kutúzov and Prince Schwartzenberg, it
his bloodshot eyes. Several approving voices were heard in the crowd.
    CHAPTER II
CHAPTER XVI
evenly, and then raised his head. He had an intellectual and distinctive
before an enemy who, after losing HALF his men, stood as threateningly
highroad along which the troops were moving. But not far from Bald Hills
for the accomplishment of his role, so much as all those round him who
him or go away. “No, he does not want it!” Pierre concluded. “And I know
dangles.... See, she’s got a little hunting horn!”
at the door. In a suffering and weary voice he was saying something to




actually did. He remained in Moscow till October, letting the troops
“What is your conception of Freemasonry?”
quick.
“Let me ask her,” said Pierre. “Did you see it yourselves?” he
the seclusion of our lodge—we must act—act! We are drowsing, but we

wide-open space adjoining the Povarskóy on one side and the gardens
Zinaída Dmítrievna’s health, and so on.

become of that scoundrel?” he asked Denísov.

to present itself was the will of the gods and, after that, the will of

“‘I showed them the path to glory, but they did not follow
that firing, Count Ostermann-Tolstóy’s adjutant came galloping from
Though I don’t like letting you go, it is the best way. So go, with
“That’s not right, sir. Come to your room, please, and rest. Allow me to
time, in the second case it is the origin); and the question of how
In general at Bald Hills the little princess lived in constant fear, and
here for?” He rose and went up to Borís.
commander of the left flank of the infantry of the first army, a place,
not produced an effect upon him—he had not even once recalled it. But
holding the horses. Balagá took his seat in the front one and holding

objects mentioned by the Rhetor, this last, that of improving mankind,

enjoy dancing with me.”
declivity to his right. He looked in that direction, but though the
Rostóv stood at that corner for a long time, watching the feast from a
immortally victorious name on the Pyramids, would affect this enfant du
otherwise than as he had been here. She now saw him again as he had been
Rostóv, who had just celebrated his promotion to a cornetcy and bought
was beginning to make plans for marrying one of the richest heiresses in
out his flat feet with outturned toes in their bast shoes. “I took him
with me in the carriage.”
shoulders, and chest and stomach involuntarily protruding, had that
directed during the whole campaign from Moscow to Vílna—not casually or
interrupting one another and mingling with the rustling of dresses and
“Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowager Empress by her
desire; that the enemy must be offered “a golden bridge”; that neither

happy smile, ambling lightly up to the count’s niece. “I have come,
her neighbors, as Christ loved mankind. Countess Mary’s soul always
Before joining the Western Army which was then, in May, encamped at
of correcting her faults, the possibility of a new, clean life, and of


fallen!”
Uhlans were galloping back, not to the place they had occupied but more
humorist, showing his teeth chaffing Pierre. “Awkward baggage!” he added
“I make bold to inform your honor that the rude peasants here don’t
sky with clouds that had risen and were floating still higher, and
and said what she had to say. Then Efím deliberately doffed his hat and
orders while in reality learning from them their methods, their manner
the word angina was repeated with great satisfaction.
look, and her father’s eyes said nothing but what they always said:
This black-eyed, wide-mouthed girl, not pretty but full of life—with
Pierre was very fond of.
Vasíli’s son, Hippolyte, had come with Mortemart, whom he introduced.
enemy’s horse patrols could be discerned.
said nothing to Borís and, evidently unable to suppress the thoughts
sometimes keeping well back in them and sometimes coming to the very
vodka. The campfires crackled and the soldiers’ songs resounded

So also in history what is known to us we call laws of inevitability,
The hussars remained in the same place for about an hour. A cannonade
CHAPTER X
among the rows of new-mown hay which he had taken no notice of amid the
how the man who put them there behind the hill could have made so gross
tread of the soldiers who were keeping step with him. He carried close
November 9: twenty miles from Smolénsk.
and sighs and the sound men made as they crossed themselves were heard.
anything, but to comply with his mother’s demands he even incurred some

here in a minute...” voices were suddenly heard saying; and officers,
white Cossack coat, and bring him along to me.”

a suppressed smile of the joy of life, now when he first entered and
“Everybody sees that things are going so badly that they cannot be
death was so certain that soldiers suffering from fever, or the swelling

offering his cheek to be kissed.
CHAPTER XIX
“Ah, madam, it is a great sacrament,” replied the priest, passing

exposed rear, or why not this Italian gentleman’s attack—very fine, or
After a moment’s silence Natásha answered: “Yes, ill.”


earth was stationary and that the planets moved round it and those who
hussar, the hussar! Just like a boy! And the legs!... I can’t look at
pleased with himself that Pierre almost winked back as he looked merrily
All human sciences have traveled along that path. Arriving at

when she covered her eyes.
her brother’s and Natásha’s love.



sides at once. He took a dozen bounds, not very quickly, letting the
sire,” * he answered gaily, raising nevertheless ironic smiles among
aspect of Freemasonry.
must be abandoned. The army must retreat and the order to do so must

“Yes, yes.” And Nicholas, taking his little daughter in his strong hand,
and so everything displeased her. She did not like Princess Mary, whom
but it lifted all the more sweetly, and was especially charming when she

more soldiers, and now and then women.
roaring and snapping and rising louder and louder, and then words of
inevitability and a maximum of freedom.
    * To force the guard.
throwing down his chisel. (The wheel continued to revolve by its own
“The vicomte knew the duc personally,” whispered Anna Pávlovna to
the walls), and the heat and smoke and rapidity of motion, produced
on a chair in the ballroom, crossing one leg high over the other,
himself with society gossip, dancing, intellectual games, and bouts
Princess Mary interrupted him.
The club cook and the steward listened to the count’s orders with
have no money, so I was going to ask the count...”

Austerlitz, Borís was unable to see either Prince Andrew or Dolgorúkov
was not mean, and did not refuse anyone who asked of him. All he cared
that her husband to whom she had written (that wretched, profligate
speaking.
which the Guards prided themselves), the officers on foot and at their
farther back in history the object of our observation lies, the more
She turned away from him and glanced at her younger brother, who was
At the moment the door opened and the stranger came in, Pierre felt a
father?”

“Did you see? Did you? What was it?” exclaimed Natásha, holding up
did not even make him a curtsy. She fixed her eyes on him in amazement,

steps.
again looked at the princess. She still sat motionless with a look of
thought Rostóv. “I should die of happiness!”
“What misfortune? What misfortune can happen to them? They just live
of the road, sometimes in proof of its agility and self-satisfaction
persistent, calculating expression on his plump face, hurriedly and
Pierre looked at Dólokhov with a smile, not knowing what to say to him.


presented themselves to her so clearly and in such detail that they

When he entered, Prince Andrew, his eyes drooping contemptuously (with
“Why didn’t you mention it, Prince? I would have offered you
Public Baths if I may say so. Ah, when one looks at our young people,
on finding that they are respected. Any violence to them or to their
of this delicious Russian tea,” Lorrain was saying with an air of
approaching. Princess Mary looked frightened.
After giving the clerk orders about the work to be done, Alpátych, not
provisions, Rostóv found a family consisting of an old Pole and his
sat down looking silently at Pierre. As soon as she entered, Pierre’s
that could happen, had been foreseen in his scheme, and that if there
sooner or later he would step across it, but an incomprehensible terror
for the salvation and glory of Russia.
     fellows. What the devil! There, don’t let us be cross, old
of the plowed land, and reached some flèches * which were still being
letting the force of her anger run to waste, she turned and rushed
Prince Andrew spent half his time at Bald Hills with his father and his
shaggy French cap.
prince.
decided now or never. On Thursdays Princess Mary remembered with a
mechanically, and then paused. What more could she write after all that
called Kutúzov) “is making himself very comfortable,” thought Wolzogen,

Natásha was foremost in setting a merry holiday tone, which, passing

Márya Dmítrievna on her right and Anna Mikháylovna on her left, the
“Oh yes, like that, I know, I only forgot,” said he.
leave Moscow and not dare to let her set eyes on him again. Pierre—only

At that moment Berg drew out his handkerchief as if to blow his nose


the people,” the abbé was saying. “It is only necessary for one

calculations of the cabalistic number of the beast of the Apocalypse now
appreciation of the vicomte’s epigram, Pierre again broke into the
knee with the palm of his hand.
experienced for the last fortnight, and the joy that had lit up her

floundering silvery fish in the watering can, on that dam over which for

And he left the room, followed by the low but ringing laughter of the
meaning of all... one must harness... my wife is getting married... One
“What does she want?” he murmured. “She is bringing me my daughter whom
from side to side, gave a couple of leaps and with a swish of its tail
But in January Savélich came from Moscow and gave him an account of the
“There he is!” said Borís, thinking Rostóv had said “His
while Prince Andrew on the contrary, taking no part in the war and
laboriously pursing his lips, “le-trip-ta-la-de-bu-de-ba, e
enemy?”
flaying dead horses, and so on, soon showed a great liking and aptitude
more manly, lost his former affectation, pride, and contemptuous irony,
with dim eyes and wide-open mouths, they were all laboriously singing




“Oh, the nasty beasts!” said he with disgust.

expressed it, were sharpening their teeth for it. Two of the commanders
CHAPTER XII
was all a misunderstanding and that no one is to blame for it.” She
room, almost all the company had assembled, and the conversation, guided

news, it was done in a whisper and they immediately reverted to general
“Catch hold!” whispered Gerásim to the porter.
dreamed I felt that I was doing wrong, but could not tear myself away

was very glad and wished to entertain him. It seemed as if I chattered
Their ships had been burned, there was no salvation save in collective
“But what did Klyucharëv do wrong, Count?” asked Pierre.
acute attacks was driven inwards and never left him for a moment.
and, addressing him, again used the epithet “young man” that was
sill to attract attention. “Wait a bit, Kurágin. Listen! If




that they should take with them. The countess sent for her husband.
quilt for his shoulders, she imagined a horrible body there, and stood
necessary to grasp clearly the meaning of the fact that, while not
I want to weep for joy.”


round once more. The French had fallen behind, and just as he looked
forehead. He went to the cot in confusion, sure that he would find it
logic, as if punishing someone for those secret illogical emotions that
unfastened cloak, wide breeches hanging down in creases, and a crumpled
CHAPTER III
the people, and of his coming himself from the army to Moscow. And as
I grabbed him, like this.” (He jumped up quickly and lightly.) “‘Come
papers and it was the first time he had heard Villeneuve’s name.
hunt, now doubled, moved on.
gesticulated, shrugged his shoulders, and finally, without saying a word
influence on me and on my brother in spite of all our grief. Then, at
to my rudeness while I on the contrary nourish contempt for him. O God,
attractive than in former days.
any other force. The forces of gravitation, electricity, or chemical
ground, and again looking at the Frenchman and the Armenian family.
right, wrote to Kutúzov the first words that occurred to him, though

relish Zdrzhinski’s conversation. “My stockings and shirt... and the
army, but wrote to his parents that he was sorry Natásha was ill and her
small debts. He could see no way out of this situation. The idea of
by highfalutin words, and Germans by logical arguments to show them

“What stupid orders! They don’t themselves know what they are
proceeding as usual. Denísov, who had been losing at cards all night,
Still no one moved. The troops of the left flank, infantry and hussars
something about Vítebsk. Now I’ll read it.”
Berg did it a trifle late for he should have struck his breast at the
and gratefully of the merits of her son and the brilliant career on
wife... God bless you!...”
truth, too remote from everything human, for him ever to be able to
subject, and was thus at the duc’s mercy. The latter spared him, and
“No it’s not that, but her action seems so jerky,” said Pierre in a
Pierre left the room and went to the old prince and Princess Mary.
still funnier. Most of the anecdotes, if not relating to the state
“Splendid! Excellent!” exclaimed Natásha. “Another verse,” she
“Vasíli Dmítrich, entrust me with some commission! Please... for God’s
excellency?... nobody knows.”
from behind still came the shouts: “Onto the ice, why do you stop? Go
resembled Natásha. He was preparing to enter the university, but he and
the experience of old Cunctators.”
“I don’t think so when I look at you!” said Anatole, following
“I should like to speak well of them, but as far as I know the facts,
imagination Natásha this time gave him a different answer. She stopped
won’t surrender, I say... Am I not right, sir?”
honey like the others, and bees fly in and out in the same way. But one
they might be laughing at his way of life) he himself joined in the
breaking off of her engagement to Prince Andrew (which they explained by
soldiers.
“See how it’s flaring,” said one. “That’s a fire in Moscow: either in
somewhere where everything was stupid and confused. A week later he
Napoleon and defeats for Kutúzov.
masses of the enemy came into view through the smoke, no one paid any

impressions of the recent battle, picturing pleasantly to himself the
Prince Andrew remembered nothing more: he lost consciousness from the
his way forward and approached that very captain who as the corporal had

rupture with her. “If only it were possible for me to see her once more!
and giving battle with a probability of losing a quarter of his army,

unappreciated bliss, long past. He could not conceive that a stupid
Karatáev paused, smiling joyously as he gazed into the fire, and he drew
his leaded whip, buckled on his saber, and went out again. In answer to
indifference.
instructing in reading, writing, and religion. On all his estates Pierre

“No, friend,” said a pleasant and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, a
be out of your way! Do go somewhere, anywhere... to the devil!” he

into the sitting room, where there was a smell of vinegar and Hoffman’s
frame, and as usual began to tell her what he had been doing that
authority of the kings and the “fate” of the ancients, to reach the same



the shed. Rapidly and timidly raising his fingers to his forehead by way
This Buonaparte has turned all their heads; they all think of how he
If a soldier, he should be dressed in regulation uniform like the

“Prince Hippolyte Kurágin—charming young fellow; M.
leaping the furrows, he fled across the field with the impetuosity he
had disappeared.
their arrival. His face looked sad, and he had grown still stouter since

versa, and insisting on his declaring himself to Princess Mary. For this

the ballroom, which she particularly liked for its loud resonance, and
generals of the suite around him.
“Bad news! He’s not among the prisoners nor among the killed!
showing the spot where it burst.
smile and with tears in her eyes, occasionally shaking her head. She

and unreasonable than a little child, who, playing with the parts of a
First Class.
    CHAPTER XIX
covered his eyes with his hand and pressed von Toll’s hand.
orderlies of the wounded officers, after attending to their masters, had
she raised her hand to Prince Andrew’s shoulder. They were the second
study, trying to enter completely into his ideas, and considered her


does he feel? How does it hurt him?” thought Natásha. He noticed her
life, Rostóv felt the joy and relief a tired man feels on lying down to
“Father, I did not want to judge,” said Prince Andrew, in a hard and
noise the sound of their old voices saying one after another, “I

CHAPTER VII
ecstasies over “Uncle’s” singing. She resolved to give up learning
Dólokhov, without answering, took the cloak, threw it over Matrëna, and
Pierre turned his whole body, making the sofa creak. He lifted his eager
general’s three-cornered hat, and held it, pulling at the plume,
of October this kind of warfare had taken definite shape: it had become
her speed. But here Nicholas only saw that something happened to
“What? What’s that? From whom?” came a sleepy voice.
    CHAPTER XIII
the left side of the road, and without recognizing it he looked with
they make a man commander in chief who cannot mount a horse, who drops

“Yes, you might, but I am afraid of getting the accounts mixed. So I
to, or what dowry he could give Véra. When his daughters were born
good and gallant Fatherland to such rabble and implanting feelings of
prove: the one that the Convention and the other that the Empire was the

listen to his tale.
plans to Kutúzov’s quarters where the council of war was to be
They spoke little even to one another, and when they did it was of very
his garden a cow that had trampled down the beds he had planted, should

“It’s in the inlaid portfolio that he keeps under his pillow,”
In April the troops were enlivened by news of the Emperor’s arrival,
While a footman was lighting a candle, Toll communicated the substance

    CHAPTER XIII
have always found that they too in the depths of their souls understand
understand that he was saved, that he and the rest had been brought
“I bet on Dólokhov!” cried a third. “Kurágin, you part our
“God is in the midst, and each drop tries to expand so as to reflect
when speaking of him and of the year 1812 they always seem a little
Speránski was doing. That precise, mirthless laughter rang in Prince
Potocka who, he thought, had gone out onto the veranda, and glided over
the country life to which she was accustomed, youth prevailed. Natásha’s
one another, they moved at the double or at a trot, vanishing amid the

engagement with Nicholas.

the tipsy guests who were again crowding round the window, and listening
capture them all?
how he had asked her about Borís.

separated into two packs, that somewhere a wolf was being chased, and
The general bowed his head respectfully, and the monarch mounted and
thinking of till now?”
window.
the whole of his army service. When he related anything it was generally
a boston player who had always been well disposed toward him, Stepán
thousand men, reached Napoleon at Orshá with only one thousand men left,
not smile with pleasure or affection for his son, but with quiet, gentle
the beginning of the new year. Natásha was still as much in love with
were rigged up for the officers, caldrons were being boiled, and muskets
    CHAPTER XVII
as if screened by blue spectacles of conventionality. So it seemed to
his excitement. “Don’t you understand that either we are officers
guest.

with frightened eyes; the second assumed precisely the same expression;
become her social vocation and, sometimes even when she did not
and sometimes flung the exercise book away.
could not bear them.

calamity. Everything that is young and strong is being enticed away and
these people what they were, but it will be clear that all those small
He sat rather sideways in the armchair next to the countess, arranging
With the help of a footman Tíkhon brought in the bedstead and began
abandoned since her marriage. At the rare moments when the old fire
rich youths, officers and cadets, who had galloped past him on their


respect and honor you, but all the same remember that the future belongs
wealth had influenced Nicholas’ choice. She could not find fault with
    CHAPTER I
Westphalians. Behind the prisoners came a cavalry baggage train.
bee sucking from the chalice of a flower and says it exists to suck the
lay with eyes open in the darkness, listening to the regular snoring
any rate loved the governing Synod and prayed for it.
and in other parts of our realm for consultation, and for the direction
delight of frenzy. He flung down the slab, broke it, and swooping
Author: Leo Tolstoy
servants had been.

being used as a guardhouse, Pierre was placed apart under strict guard.
“Yes, that’s it!” cried the count, opening his moist eyes and sniffing

of sixteen, evidently passionately in love with him (he did not doubt
that the more he valued her the less he loved her. He had taken her at


this strange incident, and then shrugging his shoulders went to the door
“Ah, there will be, and there are, many more such girls somewhere whom
Eh?”
happiest, merriest times for him and the whole family. Nicholas brought
Often, listening to the pilgrims’ tales, she was so stimulated by
of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to


     * “But, my dear, you ought on the contrary to be grateful to
was any hay to be had in the villages.
property which he should have removed, was still in Moscow and it was no

understand only because I love. Everything is, everything exists, only
“He’ll manage to walk, devil take him!” said the captain. “Pass on, pass
“Why, this one seems...” he began, turning to the assistant.
much indeed,” he said, looking at her significantly. “You’ll come
his fellow prisoners. He kept one hand, in which he clasped his tobacco
mild solemnity which has so elevating and soothing an effect on the
“Two, I think.”
to Sónya, she did not cease dancing all the evening. She noticed and
In very few words Nicholas bought seventeen picked stallions for six
Having tied a girdle over his coat and pulled his cap low on his head,

furies and rages at everyone and everything, seizes the letters, opens

solemn affair. Every general and every soldier was conscious of his own
continued to look at red Rugáy who, his arched back spattered with
success. The enemy’s fleet, which subsequently did not let a single boat
on hearing the news was one of anger with Sónya.... He tried to say,


“God grant it! God grant it!” said Anna Pávlovna.
flushed she turned round. He was looking at her with glittering eyes,
“What do you want, your honor?” asked an artilleryman, standing
her and never shall have. Why should she marry? We might always drive
General Sorbier must be ready at the first order to advance with all the


Having set off in the small hours of the fourteenth, accompanied by a
“Well then, go, go, go...” said Rostóv, and refusing supper and

protection in their eyes, evidently unable to understand or believe
     here.”
When later on in his memoirs Count Rostopchín explained his actions at
“Yes, of course that’s true,” said Pierre with a cheerful smile. “I
and seen so much (having traveled both in the east and the west), that
whistling, singing, and hissing continually around them. He spoke in the
proud expression she had not seen on it before. He inquired about her

here, from his peasants up to the gentry, is incalculable. On his
possessed him. The whole meaning of life—not for him alone but for the


standards, and of the ground on which the troops had stood and were
Rostóv had no idea that the village he was entering was the property of
said to himself, reflecting that he was not the only man unfortunate
her prayer. Yes, that was the prayer that moves mountains, and I am
the first to catch his eye. He sent him.
French, he did not know. There was no one near.
He remembered the expression Dólokhov’s face assumed in his moments
Denísov, with sparkling eyes and ruffled hair, sat at the clavichord
“Yes, sire,” replied Rapp.
the movements of the bodies, but without disproving it, it would seem


was forgetting. We must have another entrée. Ah, goodness gracious!”
the conversation she noticed “Granddad” give Bennigsen a quick, subtle

added quickly, and as if his words were always waiting ready in his
The large table covered with books and plans, the tall glass-fronted

“Go to the devil!” cried Anatole and, clutching his hair, left the
highest and most diverse Petersburg circles of the day. The reforming
where to. “Is it possible to plan or think of anything now? Is it not
alive and suffering from a burning, lacerating pain in his head.
ball. It is fate. Clearly it is fate that everything led up to this!
which seemed to say that he was not blaming anyone, but could not help

way of saving Russia. Everything came about fortuitously. The armies
arm, led him aside.
“Dearest,” said the little princess after breakfast on the morning

nose, similar knobs over his black frowning brows, and a round belly.
scabbard and flourishing it.
In 1789 a ferment arises in Paris; it grows, spreads, and is expressed
watching him, raised his eyes, and began to speak seriously:

“Why did you not succeed in impressing on Bonaparte by diplomatic
because it harmonized with any idea of right and wrong, but because he

lady’s maid was as full of rapturous admiration as the Rostóvs’
little eyes, and a small beard. He wore a fine, dark-blue, silk-lined
the table which was scrawled over with figures, wet with spilled wine,
“To the army.”
noticed this and attributed it to his general kindness and shyness,
eyes to the countess’ cruel words, without understanding what

“I know you were friendly with Natalie, and so... but I was always more
the armpits and dragging along a little old man in a uniform and
    CHAPTER XXVIII
seen. From behind this came women’s laughter and whispers. Natásha,


and must endeavor to secure that the honest man may, even in this world,
“So you have never noticed before how beautiful I am?” Hélène
Prince Vasíli’s arm and led him to his study. As soon as they were
Mademoiselle George, expressing their enthusiasm.





head (the pains had just left her). Strands of her black hair lay round
closely pressed together, and all these drops moved and changed places,
“Why talk nonsense? Say what you want.”



From the bottom of the slope, where the parleys had taken place, came
the hounds were fit (Daniel himself wished to go hunting), Nicholas
about Mademoiselle Bourienne was dreadful. It was untrue to be sure, but
It was getting dusk when Prince Andrew and Pierre drove up to the front

everything, to love God in all His manifestations. It is possible to
“I should have known you had I met you by chance,” and I thought to
brighter than before. The light was so strong and the snow sparkled with
pouch was slung. He had an officer’s sword in his hand. The soldier
tomorrow? Whom will you send for? Shinshín?” she crooked one of her

incongruous and false. It made him afraid.
man, adoring him sincerely and disinterestedly, as Rostóv had done
toward her. She did not even notice the special attentions and
CHAPTER XVI
time.
Natásha up warmly and took leave of her with quite a new tenderness. He
hesitating voice. “I thank you. I agree with all you have said. But
remain in Moscow?” asked Princess Mary and immediately blushed, noticing
God,” said Pierre, regretfully and with an effort, feeling it
lost another third of its men. From in front and especially from the
curtain flapping and blew out the candle with its chill, snowy draft.
and passionately demanded obedience, grew angry and nearly cried because
one another. To keep one another back, to breathe in that stifling
while a patient is being strapped to the operating table. “The matter is

    CHAPTER X

suggestions that they should attack.
hussars, Cossacks, and adjutants, in his camlet coat, as he jolted on
evident that the cadet was liberal with his tips and that it paid to
the one chosen by her brother, for whose happiness she was ready to
    CHAPTER XIV

“He’s chosen already,” said Nicholas smiling.

outstretched. His face was purple, his eyes were rolled back so that
stronger, as though this feeling of his was subject to the law by which
“It’s very nice, your excellency! Wouldn’t you like to?” said he.


Pierre felt that it was no one.
of use to Natásha because they kissed and rubbed her bump, assuring her
“Why are you going? Why are you upset?” asked Natásha, and she looked
utter a sound. He feebly moved his leg and uttered a weak, sickly groan
For a long time Natásha listened attentively to the sounds that reached
army were discussing the siege of Saragossa and considering the
It was Prince Andrew. The first thing he saw on riding up to the space
always happens, was met by representatives of the other. The members of
“Why? No, tell me!” Natásha began resolutely and suddenly stopped.
prince was not very well and was taking no steps to secure his safety,
eyes lit up so that her face was entirely transformed. Then she suddenly
for the two approaching battalions. While he was speaking, the curtain

had changed in appearance only by the loss of a tooth, which left a
CHAPTER VI
just left.... It is true that it was hot there,” he added, modestly.

kind, and though in his lucid moments he knew it was untrue, he was
“Well, I don’t know. It’s awkward and would make me ashamed.”
All turned their attention to the glow.
“Go, go! Before a battle one must have one’s sleep out,” repeated Prince
noticed Rostóv coming upstairs.
Guards with the rank of cornet. He received, however, no appointment
might be the kindest, bravest, most wonderful, most splendid man in the
idiot!... But what’s the good?...” and he waved his arm.
his youngest boy, had all settled down in the drawing room and were
“No.”

club, but met in private houses in intimate circles, and the
Marching thirty miles that stormy night across roadless hills, with his
so I hold my peace. An ax will be useful, a hunting spear not bad, but a
     Hurrah for Emperor Alexander!”


“Even if it were a great deal of trouble...” answered Prince Andrew,

It was already six in the morning and he still paced up and down the

luminous tail aroused no feeling of fear. On the contrary he gazed


gazing fixedly before him with feverish wide open eyes. “A happiness
touching his horse and turning purple in the face. “Vill you be so
impossible, but she stopped because she had seen by the sudden change
    * “Who excuses himself, accuses himself.”
head, with a shrewd though angry expression, standing near the first
relation to Nicholas that Nicholas had been to Denísov seven years
opened his mouth when one of the senators, a man without a tooth in his
“No, he would not have approved,” said Pierre, after reflection. “What

smile.
at the noisy party under the shadow of the porch roof.
state of things is continually becoming worse and makes one fear that
form of government holding universal sway, which should be diffused over

an example, walked about among the ranks, but he soon became convinced
The little princess lay in the armchair, Mademoiselle Bourienne chafing
where he was going, but why he was found near the fire? Who was he? they
offer.
inaccessible to me.
and loved in another those previously incomprehensible virtues. For
throughout the whole cavalry division as Váska Denísov. Cadet Rostóv,
The victory is complete and Russia will not forget you! Honor to you

In a corner of the room something red and tiny gave a grunt and squealed
observations as to what had been burned down and what this or that part
to the godmother, Princess Mary. Prince Andrew sat in another room,
inquiry. The son noticed that an expression of profound sorrow suddenly
movements.
The original line of the Russian forces along the river Kolochá had
had not yet finished reckoning up how many stages still remained to
to control herself any longer, she jumped up and rushed from the room as
dissemination of ideas, the printing press could have accomplished that


eye. A fifth, to achieve his long-cherished aim of dining with the

defiant expression which said that she was not afraid of anybody. The
witnessed.”

cloud that had concealed it, was shining, with rays still half broken
away from there. They say he has been acting as minister to some ruling
Andrew as one of themselves, an honor they did not extend to many. From

Danube covered with pine forests, with a mystic background of green
out in front of a platoon of grenadiers before whom lay a naked man. Two
her.
“Am I to let the troops have the oats, and to take a receipt for them?


I can’t sit like that?”
evidently mistaking him for one of the hospital authorities.
Rostóv took the money and, mechanically arranging the old and new coins
all up today.”
will not reach your regiment before peace is concluded, or you will
    CHAPTER XIII
that had he known it sooner things would have been different.... A
highest, we see a law by which men, to take associated action, combine

CHAPTER XIX

Bilíbin and the rest of “ours” burst out laughing in Hippolyte’s
to come that evening to a consultation at a watchman’s hut in the forest
Bolkónski’s activity which seemed to reproach his own idleness, very
turned the heads of the Moscow ladies, especially by the fact that
“Take him away!” he said, pointing with a gracefully majestic gesture to

everyone has,” he said after a pause.
on the unattractive martyrlike expression it so often wore, as she
servant.
later, when reports on the battle of Borodinó were written at leisure,
composed of Dutch, Belgians, men from the borders of the Rhine,
it. Fr... fr... fr! And don’t I see that that idiot had eyes only for
subject under discussion than those they are talking with.
Natásha’s remark, but she did not express agreement in words.
bulges, but when you’ve drawn it out it’s empty! That’s how it is.”
Rostopchín, though he had patriotic sentiments, was a sanguine and
Bennigsen. In any case many great rewards would have to be given for
With regard to administrative matters, Moscow was granted a
it seemed quite natural that they should cry, and apparently it never
innkeepers, and ladies—frightening and funny—bringing in with
“You won’t do it again, eh?” said one of the soldiers, winking and
proximity to the head of the government may be. This inevitability alone
Rostóv as he continued to deal.
and moving noiselessly in his bast shoes over the roots and wet leaves,

delightful to see.”


desires to arrest their course. Terrible examples have taught you how he
“Don’t trouble about me,” said Pierre. “I’ll go up onto the knoll if I

assumed a legal, official form and became unavoidable.
The sun was only just appearing from behind the clouds, the air was
completely kind and good and does not believe in the possibility of
showed how he presented himself, with his hand to his cap, and really
when they drink, pressing his spurs mercilessly into the sides of his
Austrian troops, under the direction of so skillful a leader as General
The historians of culture are quite consistent in regard to their
the still greater unimportance of death, the meaning of which no one



have seen how he said it! I know he did not mean to say it, but it came
had come personally to point out to the princess the necessity for her
Pierre sat up on the sofa, with his legs tucked under him.
from which the shouting came. He felt both frightened and pleased to be
possibility of defending Moscow in a similar manner.) Count Rostopchín
began unexpectedly to talk about Princess Mary, blaming her for her
gratitude.
“Why, fleas, crickets, grasshoppers,” answered the buffoon.
the old lady.
to stay another day. That day he did not see his father, who did not
He seized his son by the hand with small bony fingers, shook it, looked
was an almost hostile expression as he slowly regarded his sister and
and commotion. Every day thousands of men wounded at Borodinó were
Bezúkhova and asked her to dance. She smilingly raised her hand and
great things and blasphemies,” the same number 666 was obtained; from
noticing what a bad state of things it was. The regimental commander
eagerly addressed him. This was one of the head army doctors. He was
One of the doctors came out of the tent in a bloodstained apron,
“Do, please, for heaven’s sake, relieve me of something!” said the

“Rides well, eh? And how well he looks on his horse, eh?”
Rostóv considered, and then went in the direction where they said he

report he had prepared for the Emperor.
listened, thought of the immense difference there was between herself
regeneration.
file—of whom there are always the greatest number; of the next higher
began to grow depressed or who lost strength were sifted out of the army
reproachfully at the count who had presented it to him. Someone
At Krásnoe they took twenty-six thousand prisoners, several hundred
CHAPTER VII
little, coughed, and was always low-spirited. The doctors said that
man, positively blind? A fine idea to have a blind general! He can’t see
relinquish them.
might toward the bushes. He did not now run with the feeling of doubt
willing, are going to die in the regiment, we prize the honor of the
her tenderly and attentively, said severely:
The old aunt received the two young people in her corner, but seemed
Schönbrunn, 25th Brumaire, 1805,
Dear Count Aléxis Andréevich—(He was writing to Arakchéev but knew that
with that softened, grateful, last look she had given him through her
Nicholas.

that entered his head. “It may turn out very well,” he thought, “but
“I warn you, Captain,” one of the officers, a short thin man,

hitting, throttling, and tearing at Vereshchágin were unable to kill


greater or lesser dependence on the causes in relation to which we
suffering man. It would be continual torture.” And he looked searchingly
guests. Natásha, who sat opposite, was looking at Borís as girls of
Suddenly, he did not know why, he felt a pang. The day was so beautiful,
men who, she fancied, had suddenly learned to appreciate her worth.
“That’s just it,” answered Bilíbin. “Listen! The French entered
headquarters, and having ascended a dark staircase, they entered a small
merely owners of serfs whom we are willing to devote to his service, and
the world he had lived in—his strength, his disdain for the comforts of

him. “Why? Tell me. You must tell me!”
face, Pierre pushed his way in through the crowd.
Tíkhon, like all good valets, instinctively knew the direction of his
man, our dear Vyazmítinov....”

question, did not reply, but lighting a short French pipe which he took
churches, and books—no one and nothing met with a refusal from him,
him without tears.
he fully appreciated the enjoyment of eating when he wanted to eat,
consolations the one true Catholic religion affords in this world and
shan’t say it! You talk about our position, the left flank weak and the
wandered—evidently herself experiencing all that he described. Not only

Barclay). For God’s sake send me somewhere else if only in command of
subject—they talked of the governor’s kind wife, of Nicholas’ relations,
Bourienne who had not yet seen her.
Petersburg life, and especially the life of its salons. That life of
sad voice, as if saying: “Very well, finish me off.”


“Thank God!”
“The Elder.... He wants the Elder!... Dron Zakhárych, you!” meek and
sighed, looking toward the door of the room where Prince Andrew was,
become thoroughly conversant with that unwritten code with which he had
“Who’s that curtseying there? Cadet Miwónov! That’s not wight!
Prince Andrew.

us any co-co-counsel.”
Vasíli and the eldest princess. Pierre concluded that this also was
to the Russians as the Knoll Battery or Raévski’s Redoubt, and to the

referring to her favorite hound.

The same happy, smiling Circassian, with mustache and beaming eyes


voice.
“Really?” said Pierre. “Where is that?”
a name, and not even a Frenchman, emerges—by what seem the strangest
of them wished to or, evidently, could have done it. It was not Davout,
out of countenance himself or making others uncomfortable, but as
Prince Andrew again pondered as if trying to remember something.
effort, and stress, like the opening of a door grown rusty on its
absentees, and its peasants were of quite a different character from
They were silent for a while.
Pierre in his secret soul agreed with the steward that it would be
said he. “Now for trouble!” Rostóv looked out of the window and

themselves! If only they knew how little I am concerned about any of


the stalls. In the front, in the very center, leaning back against
Alpátych went up to a large crowd standing before a high barn which was

sitting at tea with Bilíbin. “The fete is for tomorrow. How is your


it were seven hundred miles of hunger-stricken, hostile country; ahead
unwinding the band on the second leg. In this way, having carefully
Karp, who possessed great influence in the village commune and had
“I quite agree with you!”

lodge.
the house and along the path that led to the back porch. He knew Sónya
was rather out of place in this brilliant society, the whole company had

why they all looked so at him, and flattered by this general admiration
From the battlefield adjutants he had sent out, and orderlies from his
raising his eyebrows.

amazed at his own words.


   What spark has set my inmost soul on fire,
begun before her. “Must I break off with him? Must I really? That’s
its breast against the hindquarters of the officer’s horse, almost

blotch to the right was the watchman’s hut, and the red blotch below to
The prince looked at his daughter’s frightened face and snorted.

Pierre looked up and saw at a window of the large house some Frenchmen
filled all the passages and alleys of the Bazaar. But there were no
childish bare shoulders which after her run heaved and shook her

“My dear,” he heard what seemed to him her despairing whisper behind
the gory trace of that recollection would not pass with time, but that

her sobs. “I don’t know why, but you will see what he is like.”
“What’s that that has fallen?” asked the accountant with a naïve
meadow beside an oatfield, with head bowed and arms behind his back.
great man! Let us drink to his health and to the certain defeat of the

done up.

teach you to dress the men in fancy coats for a parade.... Eh...?”
do what was impossible.
“Well, what’s this now? What have you been up to now, I should like

is a mob of scoundrels and not an army,” he was thinking as he went


unknown essence of life while that essence itself can only be the
CHAPTER XVII
at the officers.

As he said this he rose, went to his sister, and, stooping, kissed
cloud over the troops, settling in eyes, ears, hair, and nostrils, and
     * “Oh, yes, the only aim is to weaken the enemy, so of
corresponding series of events. Restoring the essential condition of
man. Had Speránski sprung from the same class as himself and possessed
Berg smiled joyously. The count, followed by his guests, went into the
prince never directly asked himself that question, knowing beforehand

three weeks of their journey and life at Yaroslávl.
had the ear of the company.
historians give, from the compilers of memoirs and the histories
alone—the countess had many visitors I do not like. I ate and drank
has the inconvenience—in application to complex and stormy periods in
longer he thought the more contingencies presented themselves. He
papers from the government offices, and Leppich’s balloon and other
at him. After this volley the regimental commander clutched at his leg;
of the Russian army, sent army corps out along the different roads, and
“I ought to give them something!” he thought, and felt in his pocket.

irony because he thought she was trying what she believed to be the last
“Let the bold and insolent Goliath from the borders of France encompass

“I cannot accept your praise,” he interrupted her hurriedly. “On the
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
used to be. Don’t judge Lise harshly,” she began. “She is so
unfamiliar faces and both were perplexed at what they had done and
said to one of his adjutants, and then turned to the Duke of Württemberg
lifted his eyes to him, handed him the report and began speaking in his
wearing spectacles, sat in the drawing room in a loose dress, surrounded
“Tiens!” said the captain.
swinging their arms and keeping time spontaneously, marched with long
intends to expose his precious person to the chances of war. God grant
“So that’s why! That’s why!” a voice whispered in Princess Mary’s soul.
“Asks for reinforcements?” said Napoleon with an angry gesture.
This action was so unlike her usual composure and the fear depicted on
CHAPTER VIII
“Be quiet, backbiter!” said Dolgorúkov. “It is not true; there
Speránski went on to say that honor, l’honneur, cannot be upheld by
rose higher and higher in her throat as she more and more clearly
“But, Prince,” said Anna Mikháylovna, “after such a solemn
and love of our neighbors, the law in honor of which we have built in



“No, fifty,” replied the latter.
moments: but his words sounded so weak that he felt ashamed of himself.
“Why? I love you more than ever,” said Princess Mary, “and I will
Prince Andrew was lying raised high on three pillows. His pale face was
pass before the French Guards on the farther bank of the river, saw the
carriage at full speed about an hour before along that very road and
no longer, as it should be, to avoid or attack the enemy, but solely to
From the day when Pierre, after leaving the Rostóvs’ with Natásha’s
precious as his parents’ house.
“Come, Anna Makárovna,” Pierre’s voice was heard saying, “come here into
Bilíbin came out to meet him. His usually calm face showed excitement.
“Yes, yes, of course,” interrupted Prince Vasíli impatiently,
room in her yellow dress, wearing her badge as maid of honor, her old
CHAPTER XII
army—French, Italian, German, Polish, and Dutch—hungry, ragged, and
the details of her husband’s plans, thoughts that had no connection with
appearing on the skyline, which they knew to be the enemy’s troops.
Prince Andrew.
perplexity about these questions. There was now within him a judge who

beyond the river, and the same stern and serious expression that Pierre
my word, they didn’t let us get near before they just threw down their

“Quite well? All right then, sit down.” He took the exercise book
the shed with super human force, throwing up a mass of earth. The ground
the count, bowing and looking round uneasily as if afraid the old prince
“Oo-oo, my beauty!” exclaimed the count, “she looks better than
himself.
The servant brought back his tumbler turned upside down, * with an
self-confident.
“You are well?”
right to do, seeing that whatever unit history observes must always be
pushing back his chair, he rose from the table.
poor, dark-eyed niece of hers was so meek, so kind, so devotedly
the conversation, “almost all the aristocracy has already gone over to
the Dnieper—which was the only reasonable thing for him to do—themselves
“Where are you off to?” asked Borís.
had perished in the fire, and demanded relief. And Count Rostopchín
Denísov’s words. “We only fooled about with the lads for fun, you know!
    CHAPTER XXIV
him. He stroked her hair and then patted her awkwardly on the back of
Princess Mary did not understand what he wanted of her or why he was
Moscow. The state of the count’s affairs became quite obvious a month
in our army. His own strategic plan, which obviously could not now
When he had parted from Malvíntseva Nicholas wished to return to the
lay in the general progress of the war. When he saw Mack and heard the
CHAPTER XVI
the direction of Kóvno, preceded by enraptured, mounted chasseurs of the
heaven,’” said her mother.

drunkenness to be expected on the morrow because it was a great saint’s
never lost sight of) and smiled happily.
its thunder joining the roar of the whole line along which he had

not being a member of the family, did not understand Pierre’s caution
the rest.”
had countermanded an order of his, and the servants now came to her
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
entered the room.
interests entirely aloof from his own and just as legitimate as those
would know anything about it if only Natásha herself would undertake
some time to get the wedding ring off his fat finger. When that had been

stock which Gerásim had replaced on the writing table, he remembered

porter. He had no lambskin cap on his head, nor had he a loaded whip
the lower and higher beings, in this vast harmonious multitude of
a suffering child and to wring her little hands even with some

left like this. Every moment is precious. I can’t think why his nieces
wounded or not was still an undecided question. Now by the fact of
in love. The marshals stood behind him not venturing to distract his
lively disposition, bent over her frame to hide a smile probably evoked
handleless cup before a table on which tea and a cold supper were laid
allowed to pass by special permission. The eyes of all the soldiers
close up to them. So many different eyes, old and young, were fixed
“I am so happy.”
hero says that he was drawn to the walls of Moscow against his will. He
gave him a peculiarly innocent, childlike look, such as she had never

reforms, simply because he was the son of his father. The feminine
intensified in the mass, urged them on. It was not that they knew that
He stopped and remained silent for a long time.
father’s study as the latter wished to say good-by to him alone. All
hand, and in a somewhat dramatic attitude was reading his manuscript—his
couch he had so feared of late.
honor I can’t allow anyone to use.”
which was presumably somewhere in the same neighborhood. And so it was

heard them, and we shall all do our duty. But before a battle, there is

“I haven’t been in the room. It must be where you put it.”
same way does the force of free will form the content of history.
largest landowner of the province. Temptations to Pierre’s greatest
words. Touched that this statuesque princess could so change, Pierre
himself. I am called in to help sort the letters and take those meant
instructions that he was retiring that night. We cannot fight in this
whole summer, from spring sowing to harvest, he was busy with the work

By the light of the sparks Bolkhovítinov saw Shcherbínin’s youthful face
quite opposite reputations. Some, a minority, acknowledged him to be
overrun half Russia. “Love... that little girl who seemed to me brimming
faster.
attended some lectures somewhere and imagines that the devil is no match
by step a group was formed of larger dimensions with new customs and
“I don’t understand. I have nothing to say,” her eyes replied.

“Thrice have they slain me, thrice have I risen from the dead. They
CHAPTER XX
accurately as every German has to. How can I explain?... Well, say your
only a small lamp was burning inside something white. Pierre went nearer
Pierre nodded, and went on with what he had been saying when the
midway, and the same increasing rapidity as the goal is approached.
and remembered everything. “The Egyptians believed that our souls have

relation to the external world and the greater or lesser clearness
might marry whom he pleased, but that neither she nor his father would

their host, there were also twenty-two hours in the day during which the

necessary in the organism of nature, and they always exist, always
brother? Mademoiselle Bourienne put that question for her.
back porch at ten that evening. Kurágin was to put her into a troyka
Kurágin who he knew was now in the army.
could have done everything differently; let us say that with guidance
“We are on the eve of a public disaster and I haven’t time to be polite
in the drawing room, talking to the little princess and Mademoiselle

The French army melted away at the uniform rate of a mathematical
feet that moved through the sticky mud that covered the planks of the
uselessly.
meant by the words all is over, “and the count’s papers are opened,
called before the ranks.
the collective will was transferred to him.

It was only gradually during his convalescence that Pierre lost the
Grabern. On the left our troops were close to a copse, in which smoked
actions of the mass but is itself continually controlled. It may seem

Under the date “5” was entered:
after six months she felt that she did not love him she would have full
merely as something past but as something present.

army was. One of the Russians understood what was asked and several
weakness but dimly felt that he could not overcome it and that his
The third time the Rhetor came back more quickly and asked Pierre
those wills first tolerated and then destroyed them.
“Well, thank you for it. Do you think I am not grateful?” And
at Balashëv and, evidently understanding that he only acted thus because

Natásha felt very strongly with him that moral barrier the absence of
to Smolénsk, beyond Smolénsk, beyond the Berëzina, beyond Vílna, and
“Flesh, bodies, cannon fodder!” he thought, and he looked at his own

we’ll give you some food, only let us know whether you are an honest

wearing long dresses for the first time. With scarcely any exceptions
moderately and after dinner copied out some passages for the Brothers.

husband that for her it was the surest sign of something being wrong

be able to resist calling him out, any more than a ravenous man can help
staccato manner.
them some of the plate and bronzes that were in the drawer, moved
Each visitor performed the ceremony of greeting this old aunt whom not
regiment had just the appearance of any Russian regiment preparing for
turning to Anatole, “come here, let us talk and get acquainted.”
she would be pleased to give—with her characteristic Russian patriotism
“Friendship laughs at distance,” began Prince Vasíli in his usual
“Who do you think should be sent there?” he asked of Berthier (whom he
again met Anatole in the little sitting room. Hélène had disappeared
the superior officers, who was acquainted with the higher authorities,
friendship, of his various meetings with him, and especially of the last
mental image of his future activity in this direction rose in his mind.
In ten minutes the table was ready and a napkin spread on it. On the


struck him by her beauty on the preceding day. Today, when he had caught
Just as Prince Andrew was a young man who gave promise of rising high
began to expound his plans to a general sharing his quarters, until
“It’s all very well for you... I am not envious... I love you and
a chain of such contradictions. This contradiction occurs because after

grass, and gazing at the dust that covered his boots; now he took big
him, or what was said of him; he was only glad that people were standing
that in spite of Karatáev’s affectionate tenderness for him (by which
French in the same tone as those that had been addressed to her, and
The right thing now was, if not to retire from the service, at any rate
send his orderly staff officer, and later Prince Andrew also, to order
your Frenchmen! Only wait till it gets dark and I’ll fetch you any of
corner of the room sat a chanter reading the psalms.
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United

“Oh, if only he would come quicker! I am so afraid it will never be!
day at dinner, informed Bolkónski that the sovereign wished to see him
Moscow, when the whole population streamed out of Moscow as one man,
9th December
Alexander’s, a third that it was due to the power of some other person.
hearing how ill he is.”
squatting on his heels in front of a clerk. The clerk, with cuffs turned
Natásha did not change her position, but her whole body heaved with
sufficed to destroy the whole cosmography of the ancients. By disproving
to go armed to the Three Hills tomorrow, and that there would be a big
appreciation of this remark.

“Who’s to put it out?” Daniel Teréntich, who had hitherto been silent,
From the officer down to the lowest soldier they showed what seemed like


placarded everywhere:
Princess Mary, listening to Natásha’s tales of childhood and early
consciousness that he was not a bad man, and he felt this because he saw
“Well, what about my plan? Peter Kirílych, for heaven’s sake! You are my
him that nearly all the troops were starting and there ought to be an
    CHAPTER XXVII
effort to move her shoulders or bend her arms when turning, or stamp
inhabitants on whom they were quartered. Braunau was the headquarters of
Prince Andrew, his face distorted with fury, rode up to him and raised
“Ah what a calamity! You say the affair was decisive? But Mortier is
Prince Andrew knew Denísov from what Natásha had told him of her first



been written. He took the letter from Michael Ivánovich’s hand, put it
forming a complete whole with her dress, but all the charm of her body

It would not ache—it would be well—if only they did not pull it, but
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
from finishing, she bent her head with a movement as graceful as


he (though Pierre had not mentioned Bonaparte), “but Bonaparte when

back to the Emperor retired two steps, twitching off the cloth at the
Along the broad country road, edged on both sides by trees, came a high,
swiftness aiming at his scut, and, thinking she had seized him, rolled

first child who was delicate, when they had to change the wet nurse
An hour later Dunyásha came to tell the princess that Dron had come, and
sides, the frightened baby began to cry, and people crowded silently
should be trying to entertain her and pretending to admire her nephew,

and the happy complacent smile that slightly puckered his lips when

all they could to destroy themselves. From the time they turned onto
“So you are really going to the war, Andrew?” she said sighing.
time that evening, vainly expecting someone, now smiling at someone, now
life; and we ought to understand that and not play at war. We ought to
gaiety with which Zherkóv spoke, and to the intentional coldness of
told you, but you would not believe it,” she said triumphantly. “He
rode through the streets to comfort the inhabitants, and, despite his

part of his mind her image rose in all its womanly beauty.

though of this Prince Andrew said nothing to his sister, was that in the
abandonment of Moscow.”


had been so blocked by vehicles and troops, so many things had been


all up.”
that dreadful abyss, Pierre said to himself: “What am I doing? I need
Yet some fate constantly threw them together.
nor believed that it could be taken from them.

her since he last saw her was immense. She had grown thin and pale, but

called her nephew—and playing with him.

After dinner Speránski’s daughter and her governess rose. He patted

“Sire, I expected nothing less than to find you at the gates of Moscow,”
latter and no one else, while showing servile respect to Kutúzov, could
the room. Pierre went close up to him, but Davout, evidently consulting

probably think it easy to gain victories!” he thought. His eyes
difficult and important one, was entrusted to Dokhtúrov—that same modest
“But how are you going to stop them?” replied another officer. “There is

Russian side merely because in Petersburg—far from the seat of war—a
husband’s became more and more melancholy and solemn, as though there
wagon.


discipline fails, not for a few hours only as in a battle, but for

and more attractive.
the old soldier, yawning.
supported him under the arms. There was a gurgle in his throat and he


Andrew had already heard from his wife in the presence of others some
distinguished his form and her shortsighted eyes tried to make out his
Hippolyte interrupted her with the words: “Le Roi de Prusse...” and
The movement of humanity, arising as it does from innumerable arbitrary
“It’s time, Count; it’s time!” cried the adjutant.
JULIE
Kutúzov walked through the ranks, sometimes stopping to say a few
mummers.
Next day the Emperor arrived in Moscow, and several of the Rostóvs’
the long German carts six or more pale, dirty, bandaged men were being
Prince Andrew in his riding cloak, mounted on a black horse, was looking
promise and could not bring herself to decide to do what was demanded
mindful of his uprightness and meekness, reward him according to his
foremost began to turn, while those behind began to halt. With the same
hardly able to restrain her tears and maintain the artificial smile
Princess Mary, despite the dissuasions of Alpátych, her nurse, and the
of bareheaded officers, soldiers, and militiamen surrounded the icon.
not be war because Paul Ivánovich had offended Michael Ivánovich. And
The facts were that Ilágin, with whom the Rostóvs had a quarrel and
hail, following a track freshly made by the artillery over the furrows
calling him a court weathercock and an old satyr.

that direction. Projectiles began to fall still more frequently in the
in chief would be. Though the aide-de-camp did not know these
these words pained her for a moment. She remembered her brother and his
had fixed on that number because forty-three was the sum of his and

The cart in which the officer lay was turned into the Rostóvs’ yard,

Bazdéev’s books and papers appeared to him the most necessary.
“But for you and me, old fellow, it’s time to drop these amenities,”
right flank too extended,” he went on. “That’s all nonsense, there’s
blackened to the wrists. There were sounds of men slapping one another,
“Good evening, gentlemen,” said Dólokhov.
Murat. Bonaparte himself, not trusting to his generals, moved with all
warmth in his body, an amiability toward all his fellows, and a

somewhere nearer the sun.”
or in heaps. Neither Napoleon nor any of his generals had ever before
“What? Revolution and regicide a grand thing?... Well, after that...
electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help
secret malevolence in their hearts.

A group of bareheaded peasants was approaching across the meadow toward
our most gracious sovereign lord, the Emperor Alexander Pávlovich; be
embarrassment looked Pierre straight in the face.
along the lines.
wind. The only motion in the air was that of the dripping, microscopic
again shook with a deep ringing laugh, the laugh of one who always eats
the progress of the war. This committee came to the conclusion that
Prince Andrew led Pierre to his own apartments, which were always kept
And Borís says it is quite possible. You know I have told him all about
meaning. One can cut off a slice of bread, but not an army. To cut off

posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied

convicts stopped when they reached the post and, while sacks were being
taken by the fight, and that course never can be known in advance and

It was growing light, the sky was clearing, only a single cloud lay in

on the arm of a colonel of hussars, a man of importance to them because
more. But after her visit the old countess spoke of her several times a
off, fell on the balcony parapet, and then to the ground. A coachman in
broken leg, that lay screaming piteously beside the harnessed horses.
a shot, and our troops could be seen hurrying to the crossing.
that does not exist, and to recognize a dependence of which we are not
leather breeches tightly fitting the fat thighs of his short legs, and
surrender of most of the Prussian fortresses had been received, when our

evident duty.” She paused. All were silent, expectant of what was to
“Assure the Emperor Alexander from me,” said he, taking his hat, “that

that out of her pure, quiet love for Nicholas a passionate feeling
Toward evening Ilágin took leave of Nicholas, who found that they were
having turned with words of comfort to her companion, realized that
was displeased that evidently important news had reached the Emperor
the uniform thrown down beside him. Four soldiers were holding him, and
CHAPTER XIV


entrenchments being thrown up, the freshly dug clay of which showed up
serf carpenters out of their own birchwood. The house was spacious
know how to deal with them.”
tents came now loud angry cries and now plaintive groans. Occasionally

Anatole. “Ah, I know, I know,” she said with a sly glance, “your
had already left for Moscow.
alone during the retreat of the French said that all our maneuvers are
his nose.
it. And now it will never, never be possible to put it right.” And
were therefore awkward.


has proposed to Sónya!”
request on behalf of his master.
But all was still quiet. A damp dull autumn morning was just dawning. On
A commander in chief’s business, it would seem, is simply to choose one
shall have to suffer, so today I’ll go and rest.”
agriculture, or slay their fellow creatures.
our members as much as possible to reform their hearts, to purify and
voice, opening his door.
Nothing outside himself had any significance for him, because everything
CHAPTER VI

tears. As he listened he did not think of Prince Andrew, nor of death,

around, were delicately green with fluffy young shoots.
shoe.
reflected on theirs.
officer passing by addressed him:

“Where? At Bykov’s, at the rat’s... I knew it,” replied a piping
only an expression for the unknown remainder over and above what we know

1789 and so forth, and at another plainly say that the campaign of 1812


this misery, and money, and Dólokhov, and anger, and honor—it’s all
observed in her at this time. He was, however, preparing to go away and
attempts made to keep in mind the difficulties of the actual position.

hair in his beard or on his head, and his whole body gave an impression
it to the saddle. Their horses, bridled and with high saddles, stood

romance. Nicholas Rostóv! She was surrounded, and they wanted to kill
“Mamma, don’t cry! Only tell me that you wish it, and you know I
inevitability without any freedom, we must assume the knowledge of an
there is so much happiness; but here... groans, suffering, fear, and
He ordered his horse to be saddled and, leaving his regiment on the
from the doctrine of the equality of man, or the very cruel wars and

came Márya Dmítrievna and the count, both with merry countenances. The
has promised to come this evening.”
About midnight they heard the sound of steps in the snow of the forest,
other manifestations of life. And so it is with the purpose of historic
noticeable gap on one side of his mouth; in character he was the same as
gathered round Nicholas in the sitting room.

personal spite against each of the prisoners, in unexpected contrast to

pursuing the Russian rearguard he came upon the left flank of the
on his bed, ran all disheveled out of the mud hut to embrace him,
fingers to his lips he hastened away.

if we occupy the villages of Sokolnitz and Kobelnitz, whereby we
“No, my fwiend! The Tugendbund is all vewy well for the sausage eaters,
the minister and his son had arrived, but the appearance of both had
“One of Plátov’s Cossacks says that Plátov’s corps is joining up with
Without admitting divine intervention in the affairs of humanity we
her neck.
word; and he sat down at the nearest table.
on reaching Bald Hills it struck him as strange and unexpected to find
danger. Formerly only bees laden with honey flew into the hive, and they
        To my native land...”
religion?”



hypocrite, a rascal who has himself roused the people to riot. Didn’t
stocking and resolved not to turn round till it was finished.
did not wish to, believe that.

qualities.

forced on me. Even now” (he emphasized the word) “I am ready to receive


thoughts with the bitter conviction that he would not be understood.
“Get in,” said Kutúzov, and noticing that Bolkónski still delayed,
sat in an armchair in her dressing jacket and nightcap and Katie, sleepy


unsuitable now, just because he plans out everything very thoroughly and
She felt agitated and tormented, and the cause of this was Kurágin whom
in front of the ranks with tail stiffly erect till suddenly a shell fell

“It was all they could do to rescue the poor man,” continued the

quarters at Mikháylovna on the Smolénsk road:
“It won’t be just yet—someday. Think what fun it will be when I am his

man. Either this look meant nothing but that as long as one has eyes



She paused, feeling that she was not telling the truth. Natásha noticed
satisfaction.
faithful to me for the whole year of my absence! Like the gentle dove
“I, I...” said Pierre, feeling it necessary to minimize his social
“That’s for them all,” he said to the officer who came up.
fifth group, displaying the profundity of their strategic perceptions,

and had it not been for two friends who had borrowed large sums from
happiness or peace of mind. Can anything in the world make her or me
when he would go. Pierre noticed this but could not go. He felt uneasy
which all other governments can continue in their customary course and
them to his cheeks.
with his podgy old hands resting symmetrically on its arms. At the sound
his grandfather called him) smiled at Pierre and let himself be taken
thought of Natásha and of her own youth, and of how there was something
without a stepmother either! Only one thing, no more women are wanted
face vanished; she frowned and overwhelmed Pierre with a torrent of
attention was engrossed by watching the family circle—separated from all
consequently some thought him proud and others thought him stupid. The

to her nephew who had entered the room.
as the officer came up to it a man in a gray coat with a shaven head was
him merged in Rostóv’s mind into a single feeling of terror and pity

seemed now present, now past, and now future.
The case was evidently this: a position was selected along the river
Before sunrise he was awakened by shouts and loud and rapid firing.
house for your wife is ready. Princess Mary will take her there and
Already, at the beginning of this chase, Daniel, hearing the ulyulyuing,

Nicholas, scratching Mílka behind the ears.

And these are the three ways in which the historians do explain the
lifeless but still existed. There were bazaars, shops, warehouses,

should be glad and not cry.”
Club or to pay calls?” All men seemed so pitiful, so poor, in comparison

was going on among the staff of the army. A was undermining B, D was
Kozlóvski scanned the ranks resolutely and included Rostóv in his
“Uncle’s” horse with the serene air of a conqueror.


approach of those in authority. The prisoners thronged together and were
nearer... now she was ahead of it; but the wolf turned its head to face
himself exclusively to Natásha for whom he had always had a particularly
“The hollow is impassable—there’s a swamp there,” said the esaul. “The
“Natásha,” said she, “you asked me not to speak to you, and I
working his way with his elbows, but the woman just in front of him, who
heartrending scene.... It was a convoy of conscripts enrolled from our
feverish delirium or drunkenness.

of his reign, being the savior of Russia.
more violently than ever yesterday evening, last night, and today. The

suddenly said, “I know that I shall never again be as happy and

enveloped in those beams, he heard his voice, that kindly, calm,
though from Prince Andrew’s letter it was evident that to remain at Bald
From early morning the smart clean troops were on the move, forming up

CHAPTER III
thousand men is moving on the Petersburg road. Another corps of several

A footman wanted to come in to clear away something in the room but she
two younger ones were embroidering: both were rosy and pretty and they

Smolénsk had looted provisions instead of storing them—how could that
Emperor and the whole army, especially while the smoke hung over

“No, I considered it erroneous and did not follow it,” said Pierre,
if the whole world had gone crazy.”
battles. He saw that what he was feeling was felt by all the men about
kissed Mademoiselle Bourienne’s hand. (This was not etiquette, but
     *Catherine.
delight Nicholas felt when he escaped from the region covered by the
for Sónya and of his firm resolve to marry her. The countess, who
Some fifteen men with merry shouts were shaking down the high wattle
“Let me be!... What is it to me?... I shall die!” she muttered,
As soon as the singing was over, another and another toast was proposed
“Let that woman alone!” exclaimed Pierre hoarsely in a furious voice,
science of the order: with questions of the threefold designation of
should be kept separate from the rest, had long since been abandoned.


don’t know and never shall know, for the love of these men here,” he

    CHAPTER XXIX
Bonaparte, ‘that Your Majesty should be received and treated in my
nearer. Then the clang of hoofs, as of several horses galloping,
bullets killed many of his men. And his division remained under fire for
a small object. Kutúzov seemed not to understand what was expected of
bare arm and went on talking incessantly, attracting general attention
Natásha, and she kept saying that she had always known that Natásha
Rostóvs’ box.
gleamed.
graceful and muscular arms and neck. By the grace of her movements,
Schön Grabern affair, just as those who have taken part in a battle
asked him.
something to Alexander, and both Emperors dismounted and took each
mistake. Marry when you are old and good for nothing—or all that is
a listless old woman taking no interest in life. But the same blow that



Natásha was ashamed of doing nothing when everyone else was so busy, and
had long since promised to hand over to him some papers of her deceased
lay across the bed with his head lower than the pillow, and was smacking
While the Emperor was dining, Valúev, looking out of the window, said:
consider characteristic of the country—rumors of war are heard
be rumpled.
that the bee flying with the pollen of a male flower to a pistil
him, and her eyes met his beaming at her. She set herself a task on her
for having failed to do so.
Natásha glanced with frightened imploring eyes at Prince Andrew and at

was Vasílisa, the wife of a village elder, who slew hundreds of the

mother’s sympathy while she rubs the bump comforts it. The doctors were
or followed by other circumstances, might have proved ruinous to the
Denísov wore a Cossack coat, had a beard, had an icon of Nicholas the
triumphantly, proudly, and with sly merriment, the fear that had at
it?”
way. At Tarútino Kutúzov received what was almost a reprimand from
tripping rapidly across in her little shoes trimmed with bows, ran

Rostóv, when their leave permits had been passed at the town gate and
watched this slim, graceful countess, reared in silks and velvets and so

the battery to retire as quickly as possible. When the supports attached

(delivered by the French alone) was still to be heard from numerous
was kept out of their minds by the fact that they saw they were


caught up with the two foremost borzois, pushed ahead of them regardless
“To try his luck or the certainty?” Rostóv asked himself.
“A bayonet wound. I remained at the front. Remember, your
he appeared to them a rather mysterious and superior being. The very
affinity are only distinguished from one another in that they are
from him. “He used to have a predilection for Bacchus.”
me!”
would ask mercy, but I’m being court-martialed for bwinging wobbers
herself.
the causes of phenomena—the old method of history is moving.
she had just vacated. “You have made the place warm, I must say,” he
happened to you in Moscow was a misfortune.”—“I regret it very
young man’s shoulder.
and an infinite series of causes.
repeat his question.

inflammation of his bowels, which were injured, were in the doctor’s


riding a fine bobtailed horse, and a civilian—an accountant who had
I replied that sloth was my chief temptation. He shook his head
glanced at Berg with a smile.
fate and in spite of the pleasures and distractions around me I cannot

came together and crowded in the large drawing room by the door of the
not love liberty and equality? Even our Saviour preached liberty and
“Not hurt, Petróv?” asked one.
campaign. It had been neither at Pultúsk nor at Preussisch-Eylau and,
the higher laws.
carts to pillage the town, and in general personally failed to manifest
We should in fact have reached those two fundamentals of which man’s
to him.
of hope. The previous autumn, the hunting, “Uncle,” and the Christmas
lay by the riverside. They rode across that bridge into the village of
    CHAPTER IX
quarter of his army he would certainly lose Moscow. For Kutúzov this was
“I sent Uvárka at dawn to listen,” his bass boomed out after a

sense of joy or relief, he gazed at what was taking place. The fifth man
feeling herself bound to Princess Mary by affection, learned to love her

up to the window of the first house, when a familiar voice called him by
side, so close to our own forces that Napoleon with the naked eye could
and what to expect after it beyond the grave! How happy and calm I
Kurágin was expecting the usual set for cards that evening, after which
place and without answering drew out a handkerchief. Blood was flowing
could decline so flattering an appellation, shrugged his shoulders and
That day Nicholas Rostóv received a letter from Borís, telling him
He called the Cossack with his horse, told him to put away the knapsack
yet with unhesitating assurance that he was doing the right thing,
for Petersburg alone.
to fire the bridge, and now someone has gone and blundered; they are all
“People speak of misfortunes and sufferings,” remarked Pierre, “but if
saying: “They will swell up with Russian cabbage, burst with our

the countess; about 70,000 went for interest on debts. The building of a
flows uninterruptedly from another.

    * Old style.
anything. To play blindman’s buff? He can’t see at all!”
the tavern in the twilight of the dawn, Rostóv and Ilyín both glanced
“C’est grand!” * say the historians, and there no longer exists either

shall grudge nothing to help you. I am myself going away because it
other causes for it, but as soon as an event occurs—be it what it
them when he heard a familiar, lisping, voice behind the shed.
two thousand rubles, and though he always disliked speaking of money

“Oh dear, what a young lady!” said Fóka, pretending to frown at
Princess Mary and Natásha were evidently glad to see their visitor and
front and back. Her bust, which had always seemed like marble to Pierre,
for her friend.
he saw under her bonnet as by the feeling of solicitude, timidity, and
But at the moment when he imagined himself calmed by such reflections,
“What’s burning?” asked Natásha. “Oh, yes, Moscow.”

necessary for the position. Then there’s this house, which must be
town.
acquaintance—he wished him simply a brother and a virtuous instructor.
time she has talked of him like that.”
She opened the door and stepped across the threshold and onto the cold,
stood out sharply above the black collar of his uniform, and he smelled
“I think, Princess, it is not convenient to speak of that now,”
“I know,” interrupted Bilíbin, “you’re thinking it’s very
When he reached home Prince Andrew began thinking of his life in
The Tsar heard but obviously did not like the reply; he shrugged his
would be the pretext, and when she felt a need to speak spitefully, the
flying beneath him and at the sparkling sky, felt himself again in
since our misfortune...” she began, but could not go on.
stand still and it was necessary to live. Hard as it was for Princess
Street.
them, neither do I condemn them. Only it seems to me that Christian
completed.

while giving orders to the steward, and at last stopped, while Mítenka

that it must live in water, so God had made him such that he must spend
Napoleon, the firmness he displayed in 1812 and the campaign of 1813)
His adjutants galloped into the yard before him. Kutúzov was impatiently
hive. There is no longer the measured quiet sound of throbbing activity,

In the year 1812, when news of the war with Napoleon reached
since.
Natásha, and Sónya, and will certainly never touch a card again.” At




distinguished and intellectual men, who seemed to vie with one another
impossible to continue studying the Ptolemaic worlds. But even after
he is so frank and has so much heart. He is so pure and poetic that
cried wildly: “They’re fighting us, lads!”

CHAPTER IX
hurriedly: “I will tell you some time how it all happened. But you

other’s hands, kissing them and pulling them away, and again began
so that you may not suffer want! And if you have been told that I am
Sónya, as always, did not quite keep pace with them, though they shared
happening to meet a wounded French colonel on the road, Rostóv had
patronage, had given directions that they should all be removed to
and the click of a musket.
her presence, joyous comments from the countess, who saw an intervention

and a few here and there with powdered hair and in Russian kaftáns.
end. Amen.”
In external ways Pierre had hardly changed at all. In appearance he
All began to run and bustle, and Rostóv saw coming up the road behind
all, and your future depends on him. Remember that, my dear, and be nice
words: “Morning dawned, the sun was rising,” and concluding: “On
an activity unknown to him, which was his life. But his life, as he
Even to Natásha herself it was pleasant to see that so many sacrifices
head. As he rode up to the camp he thought how he would impress Borís

it was impossible to get rid of them.
by their surnames), and she touched his coat sleeve with her white,
health, led the way to his mother, and having sat there for five minutes
marrying for money—I consider that dishonorable—but a wife should



are still plainer to me and I find it hard to imagine what would have

which at Borodinó for the first time the hand of an opponent of stronger
Prince Dolgorúkov ceased to listen to him and gazed absent-mindedly not
Kutúzov to the Emperor. “I can neither punish him if he does wrong nor
were really given, but that Prince Bagratión tried to make it appear
“No, Father,” she replied in a frightened voice.
she was dancing with a grown-up man, who had been abroad. She was
So it seems to me.”

you to return a call. One would think mere politeness required it....
first thought of this filled her heart with gladness.
back!” he almost shouted, putting the child, who began screaming, on the
moment this conversation began, contrary to all the laws of logic and
the leader of all these movements—as the figurehead of a ship may seem
divisions to attack the convoy.
the army and return home. On receiving this letter, Nicholas did not
live for an age!’ that’s how it is, my dear fellow. And here we live,


of expression on his face. Now his forehead would pucker into deep folds
removed the leg bands by deft circular motions of his arm following
up to Pierre, pale and with shining, radiant eyes.
Mademoiselle Bourienne, “Mary’s is a face which such a coiffure does

Balashëv knew how to reply to each of Napoleon’s remarks, and would
on!—ought to burst out.”
weeping. Tears filled the thin man’s eyes, and the fat otkupshchík
“I concluded that if I reported to your Serene Highness you might send
calèche stopped in front of the regiment. Kutúzov and the Austrian
been refused. He asked in a hesitating, piteous voice.
“Mon cher, even in this case you can’t do without Michael
The servants gathered round Natásha, but could not believe the strange

Prince Andrew said nothing to Túshin. They were both so busy as to seem
To all these inquiries he gave brief and angry replies indicating that
hatred of the French.
fast asleep with his head on his arm.

Anna Pávlovna’s reception was in full swing. The spindles hummed

a devastated road—is explained to us as being due to profound
“That’s just it,” interrupted Dolgorúkov quickly, laughing.
rights in proportion to the severity of the reverse, and if its army


cock, laid the table for two, all properly, and sat down. After sitting

too well not to detect that (while hiding it from others) at heart
take who got there.)
The tears flowed faster still from the countess’ eyes. She took his hand

whispered to him. “This happiness is for those who have not in them
Pashette open her eyes.”
observed by the universal historians, and so to explain the resultant
adjutant, Zherkóv, an orderly officer, the staff officer on duty,
and again it turned uselessly in the same place.
the reproachful tone of a man who has repeated the same thing more
The grown-up members of the family, not to mention his wife, were
to the Emperor and that the latter disliked his face and personality
mixture onto the floor and asked for some more water. The maid brought

It was still quite dark outside. The rain was over, but drops were still
asked the prince’s permission to ride round the position to see the
them something funny and kept them amused, while he watched the young
battery. Several men were lying about who had not been removed. Around


needed for success in the service was not effort or work, or courage, or
The band struck up the newly introduced mazurka. Nicholas could not
guarding against the shock—for they had been running together at full
“Well, Peter Kirílych, let’s go and have a smoke,” he said.
“I...”
moved to Moscow. At that time enthusiasm for the Emperor Alexander’s
awaiting what to his mind was a necessary, if but formal, observance of


some great change had come over him that day. He was silent all through
light, and its long uplifted tail, shone the enormous and brilliant
presence will inspire me, and I shall speak to them as I always do:
her guests, first the vicomte and then the abbé, as peculiarly choice
thought he (he had said so to Túchkov at Smolénsk). From that point of
army that had not suffered in the battle, and though still holding their
her.

remembered long afterwards. Nor did she cry when he was gone; but

Petersburg, paid calls, and prepared everything for a brilliant wedding.
referred to when she said: “This suddenly happened,” had occurred two
talking to them about matters unconnected with the battle.
Napoleon. “If he weren’t afraid of a battle why did he ask for that


up with fear as if he every moment expected another blow, gazed up at


“Are you asleep, Mamma?”
Andrew mirthless and tiresome. Speránski’s high-pitched voice struck

another, unite to defeat the intentions of the evil-minded, obey the
“What division are you?” shouted an adjutant, riding up.

to pinch his neck. Those who entered went up one by one to the field

of wind blowing over the army slightly stirred the streamers on the
“You are not what you say,” returned Davout.
opened the door softly and saw her, in the lilac dress she had worn at
He pressed her hand and released it, and she went back to the candle and
“No one is right and no one is to blame; so she too is not to
was considered to be the most suspicious of all. When they had all been
fields and bushes, those large balls of smoke were continually appearing
 in all 62 guns.
“And she’s in love with Borís already. Just fancy!” said the
obstinacy—as you please—is still as great, marry! And that’s my
as the French entered. But the French entered and still Pierre did not
if the aim of the battle was what actually resulted and what all the
He ate his supper of buckwheat soup with horseflesh and chatted with his
with a clear, bright expression, as if asking them to notice how calmly
weakness of the French, and the administration of that shock which
In whatever direction a ship moves, the flow of the waves it cuts
“Say what you like,” exclaimed Sónya, in a despairing voice as she
the fields on which these men were floundering about. As soon as they
Peter the valet, who was now wide awake, had roused the doctor.
“To your places!” cried the young officer to the men gathered round
Lavrúshka noticed this and to entertain him further, pretending not to
“Is she clever?” she asked.

CHAPTER XXVI

really was suffering at that moment. When the captain went out and he
CHAPTER XIX
presented a very sad and depressing spectacle.
The idea of being made a fool of and of having thrown away that whole
thousand Austrians, with a hundred thousand Russians, were to operate in
people combine in a certain formation in which they all take part, and




And the risk to which he would expose his life by carrying out his


moving freely, then the laws of Kepler and Newton are negatived and no



and discuss its possibility, but only to prove his own rectitude and
Berg was sitting beside the countess consoling her with the respectful
have any ill feeling for me. I beg you to forgive me.”
light of the illuminations and to the sound of music talked to her for a



only that all the men of the day were mere babies who did not know the

himself.
been minutely described. Princess Mary was sitting alone in her room,
understanding. He could only hear and see. And he had only one wish—that

“But what about my heirs?” said Pierre. “Supposing I suddenly marry...

$5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with

success and at the inability of others to understand these things.
the plan of operation for the coming campaign. He explained how an army,
church procession. Following the battalion that marched along the dusty
her face, and then immediately he saw beside her Dólokhov’s handsome,
starving.”

first to one side and then to the other watched the smokers with evident
“Where is your dispatch?” he inquired. “Give it to me. I will send it to
sentence as from the attempts the vice-King made to execute the orders
scoundrel admitted? She was the cause of it all. With her, he said, he


executing him, killing him, depriving him of life—him, Pierre, with all

Only the following considerations can have led the historians to such
There was one pilgrim, a quiet pockmarked little woman of fifty called

say (as he has done before) that I’m in the dumps.”
find the baby. At last he saw him: the rosy boy had tossed about till he
father had forgotten his son’s letter on the drawing room table; but she
blushing:
which these histories are filled—admitting that nations are governed by
Prince Kutúzov. It was Kutúzov’s report, written from Tatárinova on the
the same opinion. One in particular declared with martial heat that they
devise for him is a celebration of Jena and Auerstädt. Not only is he
the old prince’s for news of him.
someone.”
stressing the word “God” so unnaturally and so unpleasantly that
The great thing is to live in harmony....”
to it were his inertia and a wrinkle on his brow indicating prolonged


Meanwhile Morel was sitting in the best place by the fire, surrounded by
in obedient submission to circumstances, he chose the latter and yielded

entered she got up quickly, changed her position and expression, and
“Who brought it?” asked Kutúzov with a look which, when the candle was


“That’s how we used to dance in our time, ma chère,” said the
this fortified camp constructed by Pfuel, and till then considered

“But that’s the Grand Duke, and I want the commander in chief or the

was delighted that Pierre, whom he did not much care for, had returned.

the enjoyment of that day was over. He did not go straight home from
it left. Yes, I told you—the whole quarter beyond the river, and so it
solitude—she did not know whether she liked it or not, she even thought
you!” came from different sides.

Véra’s remark was correct, as her remarks always were, but, like
lad with a broad rosy face and keen merry eyes, galloped up to Denísov

madly, in love with you, my dear.”
and well informed foregathered when the news began to arrive in

superior.
plainly says that this method of explanation is fallacious, because in

should ask the Emperor—most respectfully ask His Majesty—to let us know
behind the times, and had sunk, as he expressed it to himself, into
mistakes and that none of his moves were perfect. He only notices the
“Oh yes, it is horribly stupid,” said Pierre.
stoned me, crucified me... I shall rise... shall rise... shall rise.

smile was unlike the half-smile of other people. When he smiled,
bottles, cloaks, and overshoes were lying about; there was a smell of


which were current then but have now been forgotten because the event

“Tomorrow,” replied Rostóv and left the room.
turned away as if to hide from Michaud the tears that rose to his eyes,

state.”
the motion of the planets, so in history the difficulty of recognizing
so on. People accustomed to think in that way forget, or do not know,
His will; but tell me, Michaud, how did you leave the army when it
princess’ order.
naming his guests. Rostóv looked frowningly at the Frenchmen, bowed
same time, and said:

He filled the girls’ albums with verses and music, and having at last
“Quite beside themselves, Yákov Alpátych; they’ve fetched another
of observation it often happens that the observer, influenced by the
tell her everything!” said she to Pierre. “One hasn’t the heart to scold
long and warmly to the Emperor and how the Emperor, evidently weeping,
our observation, must leave aside kings, ministers, and generals, and
Mary. How good it would be to know where to seek for help in this life,
“Oh, but he was a regular good-for-nothing,” said Tíkhon. “The clothes



He was met by Gabriel, Márya Dmítrievna’s gigantic footman.
that Sónya had told her something about Prince Andrew whom she had seen
both hands, went down as far as the first landing. The hall porter was
became semidark, and the sharp rattle of the drums on two sides drowned
hundred paces in front of the knoll and below it. This was Borodinó.
whom the honor is due. Even foreign historians, including the French,
My youngest daughter is left behind. She’s burned! Ooh! Was it for this
For the first time for many days Natásha wept tears of gratitude and

had only met once before for a short time at his wedding, were in
under cover.”
soldier, with his clear blue eyes, stepped forward from the ranks, went
mother’s door. Princess Mary, pale and with quivering chin, came out

But she could not pacify herself with these reflections; a feeling akin

men—the best in the world and led by the best general—could be destroyed

And embracing her daughter, the countess began to weep for the first

he held a handkerchief, while with the other he stroked the delicate

Mozháysk and understood what the soldier had meant when he said: “They
that had been forgotten or sleeping within her had awakened. Thoughts


and replacing their purses and pocketbooks, entered the ballroom. First
severity. The dance grew livelier and livelier. The other couples could
mother’s remarks were leading to and during one of these conversations
a long-drawn groan and then again became silent. Morel, pointing to his
lack the bump of paternity.”
up the Arbát. When they reached the end of the Vozdvízhenka Street they

sternly.
bleeding hand with a handkerchief tied round it) “and I remained at
carry out the count’s wishes, seeing clearly that not only would the

and not so much smell as a whiff of gunpowder.’”
“Him... I want him... now, this minute! I want him!” said Natásha,


friendly with Véra—that dear Véra.”

“Whom do you want?” someone inquired.
The mother smoothed the folds of her dyed silk dress before a large

the man without taking his eyes from him.
theorist in whom all the characteristics of those others were united to
on both sides of him other people with similarly ferocious faces pushed
when it joined the army in the field in the second half of the campaign,
and agitation, like that of the whole crowd, reached the highest pitch
rarely left her and which made her plain, sickly face yet plainer. She

the scraping of chairs. Then one of those conversations began which last
at first impossible to enter the drawing room door for the crowd of
“Why no, my dear fellow,” said the astonished narrator, shrugging

country, but through the village. At one spot he stopped and listened.
and fell into the column to the measure of “Left... left!” “Close
dirty feather bed on the top of the chest, crumpling her gauzy pink

die. Once in the regiment I had not gone to some merrymaking where there
looking through the open doors into the two adjoining rooms saw the same
of its burned ruins no one swore to be avenged on the French, but they

days previously. That same evening a house serf who had come from
remnant, especially after the Berëzina, on which (in consequence of the
Kingdom of Heaven.”
already seated in the drawing room. The count took the gentlemen into

essential—would not have taken place. If I reflect on an action still


condition of his consent that the wedding is not to take place for a
go anywhere without him, and his failing health prevented his going out
his undertaking, going over its minutest details in his mind. In his
myself personally above all to keep a watch over myself, and to that end
conscious of it, but in the eyes of reason it in no way differs from
began riding downhill to where the roll of musketry was heard but where
face; his eyes continually wandered from one object to another.
“Why are you crying, Mamma?” asked Véra. “From all he says one
articles removed?” “To leave the town empty,” explains Count Rostopchín.


“Have you a complaint to make?” Kutúzov asked with a slight frown.

officers, Rostóv had argued that if Napoleon were taken prisoner he


it for manners’ sake, he drank it and wiped his mouth with a red silk
seriousness of his stupid smile, could not but give him a moment’s
and are drawn along.”
his plate round and moving his wineglasses about with as much decision
Now the other sister, though they are the same family, is quite

to hear him in the study talking in a loud animated voice about some
Denísov galloped up to him.

same for their language which I cannot support to hear spoken.... We in
Unable to sit still he paced up and down the room holding the letter and
otherwise in his absence.
Prince Bagratión, distinguished by his Schön Grabern affair and by
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
he looked very grim he said nothing to anyone.
learning, was well brought up, and had a pleasant voice; what she said
him a taper. He lit it and, distracted by observing those around him,
The Grand Master rapped with his mallet. All the Masons sat down in
to Kutúzov: if the defense failed, to throw the blame on Kutúzov who had
up and down the room past Alpátych who stood by the door, he gave his
loving and honoring him. “Why, I have not yet had time to settle

biretta on his head, adjusted his hair, and knelt down with an effort.
will be cut off,” said he.
talking to a tall man wearing stars and a ribbon. Natásha at once
he had left Petersburg, and wrote enthusiastic letters to his
broke down, unarmed soldiers, people from Moscow and women with
five years, if he goes on like this?” Presently he added: “That’s
contemporaries, were carried on with a sincere desire to attain peace,
we don’t see it, or it is not at all witty,” their expressions seemed

pinch of snuff.
convince myself of this I do not lift it the next moment. But I am

in to inform the commander in chief of this and, availing himself

her and yet was beloved by everybody. And for the first time Sónya felt

terror and death the cornet was suffering and knew that only time could
The man in the frieze coat was reading the broadsheet of August 31. When
with Speránski. He was too much absorbed in observing the famous
out skirmishers. He had felt perfectly sure that there were other troops
in the country.”
announce him, but, changing his mind, came back and stooped to kiss the

their theory, say that power is the result of events, and sometimes,
Assuming quite the pose of a society woman (heaven knows when and where
Man’s mind cannot grasp the causes of events in their completeness, but
had a lucky escape this time,” he added, pointing to the damaged plaster
me.”
to tear open the veil of convention that separates a commander in chief
contradiction to everyone else, declared till his death that Borodinó

The night was foggy and through the fog the moonlight gleamed
unsteady steps and returning to his room lay down on the sofa and
had to die, so I asked why that angel Lise, who not only never wronged
an excruciating pain in his arm, for which he could find no satisfactory
passing among men and women who were entering and the program sellers,
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations

CHAPTER VI
best simply to petition the Emperor for pardon. They say great rewards
finger before his nose and smiling. “You shall tell me all about that
sheaf of rye. Tomorrow after dinner I shall take the Iberian icon of

“Where is he? Can I see him—can I?” asked the princess.
The crowd drew up to the large table, at which sat gray-haired or bald

Whether they were playing the ring and string game or the ruble game or
He was flushed and bathed in perspiration, though the room was not hot.

clear to Kutúzov that by accepting battle and risking the loss of a
broadsheets, and some liked the way Karpúshka jeered at the French,
humble origin (as in fact many did), caused Prince Andrew to cherish his



society, drank much, bought pictures, engaged in building, and above

into her face and finding in his sister too something new, unusual, and

“Routed up the earth like a pig,” said another.
Pierre, and a feeling that was both joyful and painful agitated him and

cordially though with dignity and restraint.

encampment, and not within sight of the enemy before an action in




“Dear me, how jolly we are!” said Rostóv laughing.
another’s faces and speak to one another. Besides the soldiers who
down—capitally!” He could hear that Lavrúshka—that sly, bold

fortunately for her, she felt her eyes growing misty, she saw nothing


executed him—also for some reason. What is bad? What is good? What
understanding it, flushed with pleasure and began to kiss the boy with
dress, transparent over her shoulders and bosom. The abbé, a well-fed
Princess Mary, frowning in her effort to hold back her tears, sat beside

successfully, evoking memories of the best times of her youth and
daughter) to give the future sisters-in-law an opportunity to talk



the nursery, but Sónya was not there either. Natásha concluded that

No one contradicted him.
pipe the day before came up to it with two soldiers. The corporal and

bridges to the farther side, turned sharply to the left, and galloped in
When he had gone less than half a mile in the rear of the column he


but now from lack of officers a battalion commander, shyly entered the
He jumped up at the sound of her light step.
tutor, Prince Andrew again joined warmly in the conversation about
particularly addicted), he regarded even this not as a defect but as a

he slept very little and, instead of sleeping in his study as usual,
The actions of men are subject to general immutable laws expressed in
“Only, please let me command something, so that I may really command...”
waiting for him to say a word and cross a certain line, and he knew that
After some minutes, the gentleman-in-waiting who was on duty came into

it was impossible, and to her delight showed her a text in the Gospel
Pierre had long been familiar with that story. Karatáev had told it
fingers, drew out a gold imperial, and lifting his eyebrows gave it to
letter:


But Paris, Paris...”
soldiers. “Where are you shoving to? Devil take you! Can’t you wait?
Kórchevo—a certain Khandrikóv—is up to; till now the additional
“All have secrets of their own,” answered Natásha, getting warmer.
at his post. If Your Majesty does not intend to shed the blood of our
“Won’t you come over to the other table?” suggested Anna
once his voice and the expression of his face changed. It was no longer
stopped in the village at the priest’s house in front of which stood the
his mistake, he broke off short and, with a frown, greeted Dólokhov as a
were slipping off but unable to let go of the mane and reins, he
Andrew entered, marking the place with a knife. Prince Andrew saw by the
head over his cap. He was evidently tipsy, and was singing a French song

his eyes.
“You won’t bear me a grudge, Prokhór Ignátych?” said the

The marshals and generals, who were nearer to the field of battle
upset you? No, really, have you anything against me?” he asked Pierre.
Bourienne’s hand and, drawing her to him, embraced her affectionately.
“Leave off, Mamma! I don’t think, and don’t want to think about
banners gone astray and found on a wrong path,” and his brow became
Him to the greatest extent. And it grows, merges, disappears from the

A few instants after the echo of the reports resounding over the
the Emperor entered, when a ball should be given in the Emperor’s
of those Frenchmen,” he said. “What nasty brutes they are! I’d

shouted to him:
two battalions of Poles, he gave a sidelong glance at Ermólov who was
especially at the one running toward them.
cocks, goats, and in general for the animals that live with the
to say and begged to be restored to his favor. To this letter the old
troops and guns, and came to a high knoll where militiamen were digging.
the one side and Prince Bagratión from the other are marching to unite
When they came in to tea, having taken off their outdoor things and
comedian.”
good and noble in you will be lost. It will all be wasted on trifles.
One of the most obvious and advantageous departures from the so-called

discouragement?...”


house was brilliant with lights shining through its lofty windows. The

the Panins had at their party. Everything was just as it was everywhere

“O-hoy!” came at that moment, that inimitable huntsman’s call
“She’s first-rate, my dear fellow, but not for us,” replied
Only after she had reached home was Natásha able clearly to think over
human agencies; I do not understand why this occurs and I talk of
then particularly strong.
about her confinement, and how she dreaded it, and had complained of her


capital, but according to your last report you have even retreated
beautiful young princess who was sitting some way off, the center of
humility before something great and incomprehensible, seized her when
often to be found.

in the afternoon, having made all his calls, he was returning to
for Napoleon to come out, were standing at the porch, round his saddle

are many stories of his getting to know an officer in just such a chance
apprehension and distrust—but the expression on all the faces was
grains that fell. Some crows, scenting blood, flew among the birch
Natásha knew by the sound of his voice.
historians still employ the conception of power as a force that itself
smile.
forces equal to one A gave a resultant equal to a thousand times A—the

partly because Prince Andrew did not always feel equal to bearing with

major, and galloped aside. The horse’s terror infected the men.

“The withdrawal of your army beyond the Niemen, sire,” replied Balashëv.
Ivánovich went on, lowering his voice—“now he’s at his desk, busy with
overwhelmed with grief, left to the mercy of coarse, rioting peasants!
General.”
song.
he had stayed in the shed where he was first put.
everything may be over for me! All these memories will be no more, none
grudge thousands more to benefit her, or had he not known that if her
and healthy, without a dozen officers making up to each of them; women,
teeth, he began with stubby fingers of both hands to ruffle up his thick
question for him now was: “Have I really allowed Napoleon to reach
Prince Vasíli and that son of his to me? Prince Vasíli is a shallow
Well, are you off to the front?”
“I have received a refusal from Countess Rostóva and have heard reports
“I will send her to you,” said the countess, and left the room.
Princess Mary vividly pictured to herself the position of Mademoiselle
clavichord and began singing. Prince Andrew stood by a window talking
his vanguard, driving off the Cossacks, crossed the Russian frontier,

for about a minute.
ordered it!”
“First of all you must drink!”
Both laughed.

floor, jerked her thin and rather short plait of hair to the front,
saint, my angel,” she said with a sigh.
“I want to know!”

your wits. Then all will be well.”


“Not more stupid than you, madam,” said the nine-year-old Pétya,
“André,” said his wife, addressing her husband in the same
stop pillage, parties of marauding Guards are continually seen returning
Expecting the enemy from behind and not in front, the French separated
the old Russian type. His purse was always empty because it was open to
a pang in his heart. But this uneasiness lasted only a moment. He felt
at the merchant Brónnikov’s house, in the Square not far from here,
dressed, at a round table in the clean quarters allotted to them,

wings, adjusted her bodice, returned to the middle of the stage, and
singing the air the actress was singing, then she wished to touch with
little princess.
“Yes, yes,” assented Pierre.

Dólokhov made no reply.
CHAPTER II
Natásha. “Which was most delighted? Lisa, I’m sure.”
treated her coldly, avoided her, and during his stay in Moscow attached
than those of a father, but that is not a reason for me to shut my door
the end of a year began to feel that the more firmly he tried to rest
admit that what happens to them may also have purposes beyond their ken,
suppress a smile as she gazed admiringly at a gold comb set with pearls,
to the general commanding that left flank with orders to retreat
fear of refusal, like a boy asking for permission to get on a horse, he
unexpected by her that in her presence Princess Mary felt that she had
there was no one beyond the ditch now. Only some carts and carriages
order Dron lowered his eyes and remained silent. Alpátych named certain
of Napoleon’s soldiers who were not on duty—Germans, Italians, and
And, worst of all, I am growing old—that’s the thing! There won’t
“I want nothing, and I won’t be anyone’s adjutant.”
It would be a mistake to think that this is ironic—a caricature of the
“And what ingenious maneuvers they all propose to me! It seems to
to strike him, and on being led out had rushed into the office and given



at the court-martial.” Then he turned to Pierre. “Do you speak French?”
darkness.


on the lips that wore a mustache and had a smell of burnt cork. Sónya
will be taken that peasants with their carts and horses may meet with no


Alexander as though sure that the cross would adhere there. And it
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to



of people met him with excitement and enthusiasm.

“My God! What is this? Why is he here?” said Prince Andrew to himself.
Pierre and thirteen others were moved to the coach house of a merchant’s
that this airy structure should not collapse; but nevertheless it kept
drawing room. And, in fact, Bilíbin’s witticisms were hawked about
fright if they did not leave that very night. Without any pretense she
time to reply to all the questions about Moscow that were showered upon
“Lie down? All right, I will. I’ll lie down at once,” said Natásha.
to cross the ditch on foot. The Emperor, wishing to rest and feeling
turned to him expecting his sympathy in their disapproval of the
explanation.
It seemed as if from some words Borís had spoken that evening about the
a state of alarm and commotion. Natásha was very ill, having, as Márya
que belle.” *(2) The distinguished Prince de Ligne wrote her
so fond of travel, to accompany him on his ride, he went out of the tent
“Eh, brother! They’ve all bolted long ago!” said the soldier,
Near the altar of the church at Bald Hills there was a chapel over the

political news. It became particularly animated toward the end of the

moved farther away and did not think about him.



“No talking in the ranks!... No talking, no talking!”
with a heart full despair he rode away, continually looking back at the
“Is he tall and with reddish hair?” asked the doctor.
Pávlovna’s drawing room he considered an important step up in the
nurse, Praskóvya Sávishna, who hardly ever came to that room as the
what’s the matter with you? You must be ill to shiver like that,” he


received him with distinction and special marks of favor, explaining to
While Pierre was repeating what he had been told about the army leaving
really! And she is not at all so plain, either.”


head and looking like a bull about to charge, “why do you think so?


“He was taken today but he knows nothing. I’m keeping him with me.”

of horses galloping forward was heard, shouts came from various sides,

their sympathy and enthusiasm but also to consider the means by which
same time, a large proportion of human error comes from the arbitrary

The French soldiers went to kill and be killed at the battle of Borodinó
brought his face close to hers.
groaned and swayed his head.
he was standing down below, or from the knoll above on which some of his




left...” A fat major skirted a bush, puffing and falling out of
When alone with the field marshal the Emperor expressed his
him up and lent him money. Pierre recalled how Hélène had smilingly

he was quite well and unwounded. Many various, indifferent, and

stopped at the village of Aristóvo, preparing faithfully to execute the
agreed to sign. In this letter, availing himself of permission given him

decorations. She ran up to him and, in the play of the sunlight that

Rhetor said, “to bring yourself to regard it not as a dreaded foe, but
termed his sufferings, but which at the time he scarcely felt, the worst

to one and the same threefold end: (1) to brace all his strength for


“It’s impossible,” replied another.

“he flared up dreadfully—and just think of the fellow’s audacity, lying,

was already past midnight, the hour when Karatáev was usually free of
Tíkhon knew that neither the son’s arrival nor any other unusual
“And was Ivánushka with you?”
fear of weakening at the decisive moment and so losing his self-esteem.
“Well, of course,” replied Platón quickly, “the horses’ saints. One must
went off into a good humored, unexpected, elderly laugh.
and knights incited the peoples to free the Holy Land; but the people
Seven years had passed. The storm-tossed sea of European history had
comply. Anna Pávlovna arranged a group round him, inviting everyone to
alarm, awaiting her sentence) that the rain had ceased and they must go
soldiers, after a twenty-mile march, were kept mending and cleaning all


direct part in the events, and all the questions that seemed insoluble

and tried to excuse herself, as if there had been something to be

experienced the same feeling as when his mother, his father, and his
subject of metaphysics, even the manifestation of the force of free will
glittering teeth and sparkling eyes. She told of an accident they had
public good”—and he began thinking of his social duties to his family
All cases without exception in which our conception of freedom and
He lifted himself and sat up. A Frenchman who had just pushed a Russian
Pierre could not afterwards remember how he went, whether it was far, or
golden.”) He cast happy, sidelong glances at his son from under his
“My commands? Let them go away, that’s all.... And let the lunatics
Dólokhov.

questions put to him. He was bespattered with mud and had a pitiful,

and is interfering with its action and tossing about in it is its most
them sounded quick ringing bells and they caught confused glimpses of
“Oh, nurse, I’m so glad!”
was a deafening report, and all were enveloped in a cloud of smoke. The
CHAPTER XVIII
company commanders calculated and reckoned, and by morning the
all like that; one can’t unmarry. Don’t be afraid; I won’t tell
But no—this is something new I’ve never seen before. This isn’t
must go, go, go!...”
not see him at all.”
forward.

hundreds good-humoredly ending their days in Moscow.
present Emperor—more than once in Paris, and tells me he never met a

“Is it about Nicholas?” he asked.

shirt, lay down on his back, putting his arms under his head. He was
had left the room Kutúzov gave a sigh of relief and went on with his
Nicholas went out holding the child by the hand.
independently of any cause, but my wish to perform an action without a
French colony in Moscow) to remain, but ordered the venerable old

“That is why I beg to be sent to that detachment,” he said.
leader was necessary, having qualities and views differing from
advantages of any suggestions can be seen only at the moment of trial.

And he narrated his whole conversation with the French doctor and
What I want is that our children should not have to go begging. I must
and seventy kopeks, and if she took those powders in boiled water at
are the provisions.”
“You’ve let the wolf go!... What sportsmen!” and as if scorning to
They say he blushed like a girl to whom Joconde is read, when he said to

days previously had been that of the Emperor Alexander. Napoleon sat
and the cannon, under the horses’ hoofs and between the wagon wheels,
Pierre’s eyes.
company the insignificance of those people was so definitely accepted
Half an hour later Kutúzov left for Tatárinova, and Bennigsen and his
and involuntarily took a step back from the campfire.
questions: Where was he going? How was he wounded? Was it serious? And
the field of battle, who though still in some confusion were less
to the ram that was fattened. Even if they do not know for what purpose
“I am afraid of mixing the figures,” Pierre replied; “but if you
a dark-green dress coat, knee breeches of the color of cuisse de nymphe
the army, took none of these steps.

dress with her little hand, now arranging the scarf and looking at her
the rivers Inn (at Braunau) and Traun (near Linz). On October 23 the

“Mary, don’t talk nonsense. You ought to be ashamed of yourself!” he


On the morning of the twenty-fifth Pierre was leaving Mozháysk. At the
of a solitary candle on an empty box, and these officers would on no
takes smaller and smaller units for examination. But however small the
And the adjutant galloped through the forest after Grékov. When Grékov
Lightly swaying on the flexible springs of his carriage and no longer
the chief.”
“ours,” kissing his finger tips.
listened, refraining from a reply, and involuntarily wondered how this
aroused. “I’ll dress up at once and go with them. I’ll make
characteristic of genius. Even that final running away, described in
suddenly overcome by fear not only of death but of sickness, weakness,
clear.
who recognized him and said a few words to him, disjointed and awkward,

Patriarch’s Ponds, where the widow Bazdéev’s house was.
“The Emperor’s appeal? Oh yes!”
well, as all the connoisseurs who heard her said: “It is not trained,


Bolkónski and Denísov moved to the gate, at which a knot of soldiers
continued, “and about your freed plowmen.”
his skill?” he concluded.
ken, may we discern the sequence of experiences in the lives of
the marshal’s baggage and the French army, which occupied the
apply for an official post, so he had come to Petersburg to look for one
conscious that another line of thought had sprung up, and while thinking

agreeable and interesting work. His face expressed more satisfaction
in her eyes, which, for an instant, glanced at Pierre, Prince Vasíli
the soldier shouting “Brothers!” was a prisoner, and that another man
The buildings, begun under straitened circumstances, were more than

cared about; Anna Pávlovna observed these greetings with mournful and
said: “Then I will go to my rooms. You will let me know when I can see
short sturdy figure with the sinewy hairy hand and stumpy fingers in
“That used to be Sónya,” thought he, and looked at her closer and
CHAPTER V
“Into the vewy chief...” Denísov repeated with a smile.

else—something the living did not and could not understand—and which
Still less did she understand why he, kindhearted and always ready to
was to accompany them to the ball.
he knew it would be some time yet before the order, “Be off, in God’s
to large spoonfuls and chewing one after another, his face was lit up by
around.
“Since Prince Bagratión is not coming, we may begin,” said

Bennigsen and Barclay advised? What would have happened had the French
of you.”
his neck, turned his long neck twice this way and that, sighed, and
author’s remark.
frowning suddenly. “Vereshchágin is a renegade and a traitor who will
“I am speaking ze truce,” replied the hussar with a smile.
and with an idiotic expression of face. He wore a woman’s loose gown
much, and all of you, only Véra... And what for? What have I done
were not to be overburdened with labor, women while nursing their babies

spreading out a canopy of sappy dark-green foliage, stood rapt and
XVII, for the Queen, or for Madame Elizabeth? Nothing!” and he became

were Princess Mary’s joys and consolations; but besides that, since
“Papa, I have come on a matter of business. I was nearly forgetting. I
count began irresolutely to admonish Nicholas and beg him to abandon his
Schérer. At the other end sat the younger and less important guests,
murder of the Duc d’Enghien. The vicomte said that the Duc d’Enghien
So the swishing sound of the strokes, and the desperate but unnatural
and the officers collected round to greet the new arrival, Rostóv
blamed,” he said, “both for that war and the peace... but everything
as if she had asked him to do it.
my Mílka at once!” he thought as he rode with “Uncle” and Ilágin

false path historical science has followed are due solely to the lack of
to a third; and the vicomte was served up to the company in the choicest


“Shall you write to him?” she asked.
both shone with satisfaction and a confession that besides sorrow life

     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
a banister post stood a tallow candle which guttered in the draft. On
slope of the hill amid the smoke a Russian battery that was still firing

his armchair. He took the guitar a little above the fingerboard, arching
the nurse brought it to him and nodded approval when she told him that
less, ate less, slept less, and became weaker every day. Princess Mary
of it. Prince Andrew” (he always spoke thus of his son) “has been
you could persuade him to go abroad. He needs activity, and this quiet
“What can decent men do?” Nicholas inquired, frowning slightly. “What

“You’ll call round?”
one side of which symbolized God, another moral things, a third
had taken refuge here from the fire with their belongings, there were
Naples, who knows what’s what, cried ‘Bravo!’ Ha, ha! So you are one of
a loud voice began boldly demonstrating the necessity of sending

within him against the someone to whom what was happening might be
conviction that all would be well, but that one must not trust to this
She was as he had known her almost as a child and later on as Prince
interfere, making a scene on the very threshold of a dying man’s room?
stood in the middle of the room smoothing out the folds of the gauze.
drowsing off I clearly heard a voice saying in my left ear, “Thy
possible what Kutúzov had not yet even dared to think of—the complete
hand. And there,” he pointed to a sutler’s tent, “they crowd in

that there is any connection between intellectual activity and the
and animated. Natásha was in a state of rapturous excitement such as she
Natásha won’t lack suitors. Still, it has been going on so long, and
faces, uniforms, and decorations of the generals, who one after another
“Yes, you have seen him?” said Prince Andrew. “Well, what is

brushed smooth in front of the temples, but stuck up behind in quaint
with a beautiful Polish lady on the veranda of his house in Kiev. And

But suddenly Hélène, who was getting bored, said with one of her
The news that the Russians were attacking the left flank of the French
and are connected with me in time cannot seem to me as free as the life
them.

With happy, exhausted faces, they laid the old wolf, alive, on a shying
to the old conditions of life, Nicholas found it very pleasant to be
could not refrain from asking some more questions.

soldier away was squatting by the fire, engaged in roasting a piece
respect, envy, or anticipation, he did not know. Speránski’s whole
“Your excellency, I should like to be of use here. Allow me to remain
ball without fixed dimensions. Its whole surface consisted of drops
of fate and the designs of rogues. During the few days he spent in
blood on it. “Ah, here are people coming,” he thought joyfully,

coachman’s, was teasing Kutúzov’s old cook whom Prince Andrew knew,
“Well, let it be bad,” said Denísov.
where petty worldliness hiding itself in misty distance had seemed to
of the waves kept up a refrain to Pierre’s words, whispering:


assembling, evidently preparing for the Emperor to come out.
a pale face went out of the room and into what had been Prince Andrew’s
Bilíbin smiled and the wrinkles on his face disappeared.
“I know, my dear, kind princess,” said Anna Mikháylovna, seizing
that’s certain! There’s only one way—guewilla warfare!”
bathe.
“Yes, a regular volcano,” said the count. “Takes after me! And
There was a rustling among the crowd and it again subsided, so that
whom he had promised to take home.
satisfaction that the engagement had been broken off. Looking at them
into that state of fury in which he sometimes used to roll on the
by Divine Providence,” he continued, raising to heaven his fine eyes
“From where to where, Your Majesty?”

to cut off, to seize, to capture, and to overthrow the French, and all
drinking when he wanted to drink, sleeping when he wanted to sleep, of

particular—was such that the debts inevitably increased every year.

while she sang.
much on the fact that the news had arrived on the Emperor’s birthday as
and cut you down, I should not hesitate an instant, but should do it.’
raising him.
he was asleep in his corner and woke him up. Rousing himself, Pierre
I beg you to leave the town and break off all communication with such
what made me sorry to part with life, that is what remained for me had I

tenacious endurance and vigor of hardy old age. After a few more turns
To each new arrival Anna Pávlovna said, “You have not yet seen my
army desired to do so. But to make an attack the wish to do so is not
his retreat from Smolénsk to Orshá. Then his heroism at Krásnoe is
self-sacrifice, had been dispersed like dust by contact with the first

“Health to your ex... len... len... lency!” and again all became

Claparède and sending Friant now, the order was carried out exactly.
still it was terrible, and she could not help thinking of it. She was
his face that the old man himself understood how untimely such questions
The blood rushed to Natásha’s face and her feet involuntarily moved, but
“Oh, yes, in a minute; wait... or no! No, of course... go and say I will
“Well, all wight,” said Denísov.

I tell you Buonaparte was a great tactician? Here, he says the same
ordered another glass to be brought for Rapp, and silently sipped his
whom he now found nothing in common. “We will go after dinner. And
portfolio she held in her hand. “All I know is that his real will is

carriage. Pierre, evidently engrossed in thought, could not at first
and that he attached too much importance to these matters. But she knew
While he was away Princess Mary, Dessalles, Mademoiselle Bourienne, and
conveniently to keep them under observation, brought them into the
She only really took part when they recalled Sónya’s first arrival.
recur to her mind and were as if belonging to a remote past.
And what a strange fate sent me here! What gentleness and nobility there
Pierre with bright, ecstatic eyes.
“Count, is it wrong of me to sing?” she said blushing, and fixing her
struck her forcibly, and various traits of his gentle, sensitive
    CHAPTER XII
childhood.
came in from his club, cheerful and contented. Nicholas, hearing him

quietly.
“Oh, I don’t know, it is all so strange,” replied Sónya, clutching at
“Do this for my sake, mon cher; after all, she had to put up with a


up with crockery, the other with carpets. There was also much china
Wolzogen came to the assistance of his chief, who spoke French badly,
to make some preparations and to be ready to receive the sovereign.
that Moscow had been abandoned by its inhabitants (grave as that fact
Lichtenstein, le Prince, de Hohenlohe, and finally Prishprish, and so on
eyes. The Englishman looked on sideways, pursing up his lips. The man

remarked, drawing Natásha (whose cheeks were glowing from the cold)

owed to my friendship. Oh, what a splendid reign!” he repeated several
only white dresses and white ribbons all that time) gave her pleasure,
said that, if only the French made one more slight effort, it would
“Father! Angel! Dear one!” she kept repeating, wiping away her tears
to look at her now, and she glanced round quite disconcerted.
The young Princess Bolkónskaya had brought some work in a


Having descended the hill at a trot, he no longer saw either our own or
share it. He was awakened by Likhachëv’s kindly voice.

“Wait a bit, he is not drunk yet! A bottle here,” said Anatole, and
security of all; it was purely pacific and conservative.
from the shelf the first book that came to his hand (it was Caesar’s
before?” and again he told himself that it was impossible, that there
the good of that? War is my profession, but his business is to reign
there are no difficulties in your way.... But Nicholas is my cousin...

Rostóv even noticed that Denísov did not like to be reminded of the

“And I, you see, am hard at it.” He pointed to his manuscript book
aim was to shorten those marches. To that end Kutúzov’s activity was
him. By the by, Count,” he added suddenly, addressing Pierre with a
each side of the trench, the earth was cut out to a breadth of about two
asked Kutúzov, interrupting him.
Looking down at the waters of the Enns under the bridge, Nesvítski
his scanty gray hairs over his bald patch, also asked them to dinner.
far away in the broken ground—“That’s where the Moskvá River is, and

frill that surrounded her face. Her face had shriveled, her upper lip
Again she paused. No one broke the silence.
with both.
impossible for him to return to his former conception of her, that he
for that was the affair of the sovereign, but as far as she personally
yes, killed my wife’s lover. Yes, that was it! And why? How did I come
continued—remembering Dólokhov’s conversation with Kutúzov and his
intimately. Prince Andrew spoke with some animation and interest only of
In the first place the historian describes the activity of individuals

them at a moment of difficulty.
Rostóv’s soul (it seemed to Rostóv that he understood everything),

The cloak they spread under him was wet with blood which stained his
stayed in Moscow?”
In Márya Dmítrievna’s anteroom the footman who helped him off with his
Vienna as I told you. Very well. Next day, which was yesterday, those
that his freedom had also completely gone. He felt that there was now a
the buffoon, who was coming toward her in a woman’s jacket.
overshadowed by the trifling cares that engrossed him in that city.

loudly, and bluntly as ever, and her whole bearing seemed a reproach


man nor a father! You, honored sir, are a noble man,” she went on,
was out of the room.
Russia’s ancient and sacred capital without a struggle, or are we to
back.”
whether things would go well or ill under French rule in Moscow. It was
Prince Andrew moved toward the door from whence voices were heard.
those of higher rank expressed a common feeling of awkwardness, covered
intrusion of the masculine element, both husband and wife felt with
and shook himself free.) The lad was unable to walk. They dragged him
Pierre again emptied his glass and poured himself out a third.

that effort, and the flame of battle burned slowly out.
it again when Alexander came out. The interview had lasted an hour and
Bolkónski. In the midst of his explanation shouts were heard from the
them and never resists the laws of gravity or impermeability once he
sitting close to Nicholas who was copying out some verses for her, the

bully,” thought Pierre, “to kill a man means nothing to him. It must
“No, there is no change. I only came to have a talk about business,

let union with her have only a spiritual aim. That is what I decided,
somewhere else, and how so-and-so “routed” and “cut off” the French and
By the beginning of August Hélène’s affairs were clearly defined and
are clever, you are well educated. And what have you done with all these
truthfully.
Going out into the yard she paused to consider where she should go
said this some time after she had finished singing. While that untrained
without looking at him, and with a kind of fury that made him like his

An adjutant told Pierre of his Serene Highness’ wish, and Pierre went
one reviews the past and plans for the future. Prince Andrew’s face
By adopting smaller and smaller elements of motion we only approach a

“You could at least take back your words. What? If you want me to do as


“But nobody possesses it, so what would you have? It is a vicious
Pierre thought he had never eaten anything that tasted better.
and went out. Natásha had put on one spurred boot and was just getting
I wish they would come sooner. I hope to be friends with her. You have


A return to the first is impossible, the belief has been destroyed; and
faithfully as I can, without disquieting myself by examining my feelings
of a special shape the prince had himself designed, and a leather case

could alone extricate us from the present uncertainty and from the trap
Pierre was silent.
abroad, and see England, Switzerland and Italy. “I must use my freedom
to sleep, but some remark would arouse him and conversation would be
which was pitched that day on the steep left bank of the Niemen, and
and simply, “Mr. Shítov—a man of great merit”—this of the man
moment people would be too busy to refuse him. A fourth while seemingly
father has been with me and caressed me. He approved of me and of Uncle

Sónya went up to the countess and, kneeling down, kissed her hand.
informing the prince that as soon as the action began he had withdrawn

already founded; all that remained was to organize it.
front of it stood carriages without horses and things were being packed
abruptly.
“Everything’s the same with them. They know nothing about it! Where
and Natásha rested her head on the arm of her chair and closed her eyes,
felt, sunk deeper than was desirable for his peace of mind. That pale,
In front of a landowner’s house to the left of the road stood carriages,
moment the French who were attacking, suddenly and without any apparent

presenting itself identically to two persons. Even those members


men and money, a necessity that as soon as the promises had been made
bare. In the midst of the song cries were heard, and fighting and blows
and fell on his back. He opened his eyes, hoping to see how the struggle
“There, you see, mon cher! I expect you know that Messrs. Speránski and


Russians, and of disorganization among his own troops.
and all you have been doing on your estates.”
as he lay back in his armchair, looking in another direction.
“There! They are bringing another!” cried one of the officers,
all—for those who drive one away as well as for those who protect one:
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
Despite his seniority in rank Bagratión, in this contest of magnanimity,
yes, hospitals, medicine. He has a fit, he is dying, and you come and
October. Its first period had passed: when the partisans themselves,

very soul of hers which seemed to be fettered by her body—it was that
“But, my poor Catiche, it is as clear as daylight! He will then be the
will accept them,” said Nesvítski (who like the others concerned in


the raised hood of Prince Andrew’s calèche. She did not know who was
at Otrádnoe. Mítenka himself, returning tipsy from the town, used
there as he. And now—this duel! Have these people no feeling, or
I think...”

you have a perfect right to reassure the inhabitants of Smolénsk, for
After Ostermann had gone, a command rang out to the Uhlans.
them smiled seriously at the merry fellow, while the merry fellow struck


feeling; sharing with the young folk of the Rostóvs’ household a
“If no one fought except on his own conviction, there would be no
official in felt boots and wearing a commissariat uniform ran round from
A handsome, slim, and pale-faced gypsy girl with glittering black eyes
tales she had heard) to see a coffin, or him, Prince Andrew, in that
and confiding affection for his sister. He wrote that he had never loved
Pávlovna’s voice, “I see you are all right there.”
to save her, and even more certain was it that he was a man of lofty and
apparently seemed to Napoleon, as it had done to all who had seen it in

Rostóv’s and back, and back again and again in an instant.
historic persons may perhaps explain much in the domain of jurisprudence
“Hurry up, you others!” he called out to his comrades. “It’s getting
to those who knew the indubitable truth.) He forgot what the seventh
him my whole staff and all that belongs to it, advising him if there is
first—stepped quickly forward to meet Alexander and held out his hand
me apologize, because if he, as commander of this regiment, thinks it
Above the Kolochá, in Borodinó and on both sides of it, especially to

opinion. Though this was impolite to Prince Vasíli in Anna Pávlovna’s
“Is that Mary practicing? Let’s go quietly and take her by


    CHAPTER XII

before and was less frequently at home.

wonderful!” she cried, holding out her hand to him. “What are you doing?
just as the architect, gardener, or Princess Mary did, till the prince
reminded her of their first encounter in the Otrádnoe avenue, and how
come on!—you’ve nothing to hold on to.”

despair, not knowing where to or why he was now riding.
not and cannot believe this.

Six weeks after Anna Pávlovna’s “At Home” and after the sleepless

    * “To your places.”
they crossed the Virgin’s Field.

sir, for shame! It would be better if you went to the war.”

Around him in the darkness men were standing and evidently something
with a decanter on a tray as “my dear” and “my sweet,” asked
probably realizing that he was shouting at Bezúkhov who so far was not
imagination she said other tender and loving words which she might have
process of dominating another’s will was in itself a pleasure, a
to do it that it seemed to him as if it had really happened. Perhaps
She roused herself, and felt appalled at what she had been thinking, and

palpably of all on the twenty-fourth of August at Shevárdino and on
anybody nowadays!” shouted the publican, picking up his cap.
and that the position at Borodinó (the one where the battle was fought),
The invasion pushes eastward and reaches its final goal—Moscow. That
had been struck on the teeth, or what the ham had to do with it.
heroism, Count!”
something for them to eat and drink before the journey, and went into
“and you ought to sign it and ask this gentleman to take it. No doubt
and the tramp of horses’ hoofs were heard. Kutúzov and his suite were

necessary. Halfway up the stairs they were almost knocked over by
Moscow, which had just been printed, the last army orders, and his own
searching for an example, then with a clear, naïve look at Bennigsen he
honor... Eh! Call the next one! Who else is there?” he shouted, bowing
face of the old man and seeking any indication of his being a traitor.

of how beside himself and all aflame with excitement, he had flown like


“I cannot take him away from his grandfather, and besides...”
The moment Nicholas took her hand she could no longer restrain herself
and musketry ahead of him. The firing grew louder and louder.
Bagratión’s weak detachment on the Znaim road he supposed it to be
talked about her health, and this pleased her. But sometimes she was

Another, a younger voice, interrupted him: “Afraid or not, you can’t

“His children are all illegitimate. I think Pierre also is



way, dear boy! Make way, make way!” pushed through the crowd more
day.
vieux!” * added he, clapping the scared and silent Gerásim on the

far?” she went on, with a horror and disgust she could hardly conceal.

him!” she thought at such moments, with a feeling of revulsion against
“But it says plainly: ‘Whosoever shall marry her that is divorced...’”
might say something about him. “There she is again! As if it were on
a deed to sign for the princess’ benefit.
coming toward him with a smile. But Rostóv had noticed his first
intended to take up our position and begin the action, but were on this
to raise its voice. This was the party of the elders, reasonable men
and destroys the desire and possibility of having an occupation.
perhaps even possess a tinge of poetry. But just as doubts of the real
who they were, why they were there, or what they wanted of him. He heard
    CHAPTER XXIII
was a victory, despite the assurance of generals that the battle was
certainly...”
foreign cavalry with red epaulets, probably French. He could see nothing
see it.”

on mentioned in medical books, but a disease consisting of one of the


governor’s wife began to speak of Rostóv in Mary’s presence, praising
“Eh, is anything hurting you?” asked the soldier, shaking his shirt
something red—but was firmly convinced that she had then seen and said
the house but remained in the village awaiting her departure. When her
except me. I see... I see that I am repulsive to him, especially when I
Alpátych, conferred with Dessalles about her nephew, and gave orders and
    CHAPTER XXXIV
news which I have inspires me yet more.
piercingly. Seeing Prince Andrew she leaned out from behind the apron

those Hofs-kriegs-wurst-Raths are! Suvórov couldn’t manage them so
at his comrades who were paying no attention to him, and he moaned
Princess Mary looked at them in silence. She could not understand it. At
Ilyá Rostóv, cheerful, flushed, and with quivering cheeks, drove up
bald head.
mirror she glanced into it. “There, that’s me!” the expression of


lazily and advanced and again halted, receiving no timely orders from


received horseflesh for their meat ration.
and on recognizing Pierre he told the Cossack who occupied the driver’s
“I’ve come to sit with you a bit, Másha,” said the nurse, “and
believe me...”

numerous these detachments became.

“When I saw, your excellency, that their first battalion was
falling from the trees. Near the watchman’s hut the black shapes of the
of what happened after that. He only remembered beating someone and
the well-known Prince Bolkónski who had to retire from the army under

keep you long as an adjutant: a bad position! Tell him I remember
Vienna by the Austrian Hofkriegsrath, the sole and almost unattainable
    Ah! contre les douleurs il n’y a pas d’autre asile. *
she was feeling. She knew that Sónya with her severe and simple views
mainly because Denísov so delighted in her singing. She no longer sang
Shevárdino Redoubt was the left flank of the position, and that Kutúzov
children of the large peasant family crowded into the back room across
and be essential for its purposes, but in its application to history, as

“I’ll go there too, I too!” thought Pierre, and followed the general.
night a motley throng of people sat there, not merrymaking, but somberly

and had no understanding at all of the people he supposed himself to
She was overcome by sweet sorrow and tears were already rising in her
perfecting himself. We often think that by removing all the difficulties
“If we have been angels, why have we fallen lower?” said Nicholas.
She understood that when speaking of “trash” he referred not only to

intently at him with her deep, radiant eyes. The weariness she
military service has consisted and will consist in this compulsory and
Again Pierre did not wish to look and again turned away; but again the
it!”
her country house on the Stone Island, the charming Monsieur de Jobert,
and timidly in the direction of his trap.
“Yes, most precious... a royal word,” said Count Rostóv, with a sob. He
apart from myself.”

reply that Louis XIV’s activity, contrary to the program, reacted on
“No matter, Princess, don’t be alarmed,” said Mary Bogdánovna.


moment those hands with their short reddish fingers and hairy wrists,
The countess pressed her daughter’s hand, closed her eyes, and became
the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely

wounded, and Davout killed; yet at the very time the adjutant had been
pleasure of being courted often stifles real feeling in her. And it must
Natásha—“It’s my fault. But it all hurts terribly. Oh, why
at the tea table. The servants stood round the table—but Prince Andrew
il n’y a qu’un pas.
conflicts of various wills!
and Princess Mary’s helpless attempts to protect them were their
well-known, but quite false, conception. All the historians describe the
slight smile. He fancied he saw something pathetically innocent in that
“Ah, Pierre,” said the countess going up to her husband. “You don’t know
The stretchers moved on. At every jolt he again felt unendurable pain;
road through Poltáva, which Charles XII chose.” Balashëv involuntarily
telling him his favorite anecdotes and his observations on the
“Oh yes, why not? They may,” he said.

am fond of the officers, and I fancy the men also like me. I should be
still admiring his handiwork. “You’ll be nice and comfortable....”
the same his serf and huntsman.
under an obligation, assuming an air of much greater importance than he
would result from the common activity; while the man who commanded
another, more important, subordination, which made this tight-laced,
“We’ll send the infantwy down by the swamps,” Denísov continued.
Dólokhov.
time.”
sauerkraut and the young girls are “too blonde.”

BOOK ONE: 1805

position.
verses in French which he had composed about various well-known
occurred to him. On the contrary, he became more and more elated. It
of affairs, whatever your ultimate plans may be, the interest of Your

his wife with the royal prince, Pierre had unexpectedly been made a
“Why, this is a palace!” she said to her husband, looking around
the crystal decanters and fruit vases, the count kept glancing at his
As generally happens, Pierre did not feel the full effects of the
friend, simply and cordially. The whole family, whom he had formerly
dissatisfied, interrupted by another, an unfamiliar voice. From the

Now why are you asking silly questions about the Fire Brigade? They have
and no one drove him away.
lodge. No one at the stone entrance gates of the drive and the door

had in fact slipped. For a moment as he was rearranging his cloak Pierre
“I have read our protests about the Oldenburg affair and was surprised
contradiction like the possibility of performing two actions at one and

but went limping up the hill.
all four and rushing to bark at the crows that sat on the carrion. The
     Wafting sweet music o’er the lea,
pleasant, though slightly ironic, smile.

obscurity to the common task. Whatever question arose, a swarm of these
“Then I should advise you...” Borís began, wishing to sting her;

“There now, the Kúrskies have also gone past,” was being said in
thought of everything, considered everything, and did everything the
he should and doing no wrong. Only he prayed to God for death. Well, one

day, he returned to dinner, and without having time for a private talk
“Good-by, my dear,” said she to the countess who saw her to the
fair; you are going by yourself, are having the horses saddled and said
forest and the road, smoking campfires could be seen and indefinite
“He’s coming! He’s coming!” shouted a Cossack standing at the gate.
was left alone, suddenly he came to himself and realized the position
say it.”
Drubetskóy who was admitted. I nominated him and was the Rhetor. A

his own supporter, Wolzogen:
from it, the death of Prince Andrew, Natásha’s despair, Pétya’s death,
Platón.
anything. Here is a letter to Prince Vasíli, and here is money. Write
Guards marching along the road to Bórovsk. From all these reports it was

without speaking of it, they knew how capitally Nicholas and the lady

Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered

traps. Natásha and Nicholas got into the other. “Uncle” wrapped
it had to reform under grapeshot, of which Napoleon was unaware.
millions of human beings who grew up in the same way. As twenty
been told to, and the Emperor Francis merely looked fixedly into his
Nicholas immediately recognized Princess Mary not so much by the profile
      1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10
he might be, did not expect. He was so used to submitting to Prince
is worth thirty thousand, as at Schön Grabern, while at times fifty
burning sense of jealousy of “the favorite” agitated him now as strongly
The troops were running in such a dense mass that once surrounded by
grimace. “Didn’t I explain to you? What?” And Anatole, with the
one and to invite to dinner only a small number, a list of whom he gave


the wattle.
wounded men whom the count in the simplicity of his heart had ordered

on which—with a terrible questioning too great for her strength—her
suddenly overcome by that sense of confusion and hopelessness to which
Sónya dear!” she added, turning to Sónya and indicating by this
house where Alexander lodged.
still in the same place, his stout body resting heavily in the saddle
“Ah! mon ami, I only pray, and hope that God will hear me.


commander in chief could, on the first of September, quite freely decide
“What are you doing here, sir, in civilian dress?” asked a deep
“This is what I want, my dear fellow,” said the count to the
her. When her toilet for the night was finished she sank gently onto the

“I don’t know, General....”
I am overwhelmed with business and it is purely out of charity that
worldly vanities. He told me of the Emperor’s new projects. I began
concerned with a thought that always occupied her: “Now you see if I
Napoleon was in that well-known after-dinner mood which, more than
affect the essence of the matter but, like the hands of a clock detached
He bowed his head and scraped first with one foot and then with the
good news, though Schmidt’s death is a heavy price to pay for the
him out of the booth at Grunth. He was shouting in a gasping voice:
had just struck a chord.
than he had ever before shown himself.

desirous of hiding her adoration for Hélène and inclined rather
because she said something in French.”
the forces had already made itself felt in Petersburg, was dispatched,

the fall of Austria’s capital. “How is it Vienna was taken? What of
The newcomer was a short, large-boned, yellow-faced, wrinkled old
you daughter of a bitch!” said Karatáev, touching the dog that lay at

the nation and the salvation of Europe!”
the rest of his life.
    * “Everything comes in time to him who knows how to wait.”
from men above him; he himself never gives an order. The noncommissioned
to another, which is like the safety valve of a boiler that allows

was before him and listened to what was said, though evidently seeing
urgently than anyone begging Louisa Ivánovna not to refuse.
to rumors, knew how apt people who desire anything are to group all news
greater amount of freedom to it. In the case of a crime we most urgently
If the purpose of dinner is to nourish the body, a man who eats two
these peasants, who were evidently still amused by the novelty of their
conversation but think it necessary to move about and talk, in order
drawing room so wet.”
“I was coming to tell you so.”
CHAPTER VII
Melyukóva was a widow, who, with her family and their tutors and
“Where is she?” asked Bolkónski. “Excuse me!” he added, turning

silently, with the languid interest of sick children, at the envoy
passionately repents. I will do all I can to arrange the match between
Prince Andrew was in command of a regiment, and the management of that

on him—as if his soul, making ready for a hard struggle, refused to
wearing scarves and all their decorations, not only the elegant, pomaded
Foundation

subject. Hélène with an uneasy smile looked at his curly hair and his

Alpátych, who had reached Boguchárovo shortly before the old prince’s
sounds. He heard footsteps in the darkness and a black figure appeared.
confirmed by Pierre’s rupture with his wife, was the talk of society.
on him without changing their expression. “I love you all and have
running resolutely toward him.
produced on Sónya, felt for the first time the sorrowful side of the


“You know I have asked Papa and Mamma about that Negro,” said
animation Pierre had not seen in her for a long time. “You know Nicholas

of Julie latterly,” she said to her son. “But who could help loving
“You shan’t have it!” he said distinctly.
the Grand Cross of Maria Theresa, and the whole army received rewards.
to snatch from the other a boot they were both holding on to.
smiling over the fan.
components, another unexplained force affecting the resultant action.
“Does it matter, Count, how the Note is worded,” he asked, “so
    * “Password.”

Been under fire already?” asked Borís.

asking his help, but came to the conclusion that that would not be a

     * “Marlborough is going to the wars; God knows when he’ll
settled down in the house almost as members of the family, or persons
“Mamma, I want him. Why should I be wasted like this, Mamma?”
the dark.
with his decorations and placed his shriveled little body on a table.
Alexander and even his envoy to Napoleon, Balashëv hastened to inform
Prince Andrew had perished. And again in imagination she went over her
the King himself!” cried he, looking around him with eyes that glittered
compact ball, and in its place already were balloons of smoke floating
“Yes, yes, all right!” said the count hurriedly. “Only excuse me,
looking round at his audience as if to inquire whether anyone had
worldly sciences of physics, history, chemistry, and the like, into
to their party and asked to be allowed to remain with it. Denísov gave
him express his feelings, but still he has taken it better, far better,
before it was halted facing the enemy. Again, as at the Enns bridge,
that he did understand, and he really had understood all she wanted to
Dolgorúkov, one of the warmest advocates of an attack, had just
knew Prince Andrew’s former atheistic convictions.
bring me such tattered and dirty notes as last time, but nice clean ones
contradiction, will they see that they are both wrong. But the man who

this doubt to him. “Now who could decide whether he is really cleverer

On the thirteenth of July the Pávlograds took part in a serious action
entrusted to him. Natásha was in bed, the count at the club, and Pierre,
All the guns, without waiting for orders, were being fired in the
French greeting her slightly contemptuous though affectionate attitude
CHAPTER XVII

enrollment, when in reply to an invitation to dinner he had had to
His comrades, the prisoner soldiers walking beside him, avoided looking


“Co-o-om-pa-ny!” roared the tipsy peasant with a beatific smile as

informed, my friend, but I am aware that there are Masons and I hope


disgraceful to fight with a cudgel and they wanted to assume a pose en

I was really serving my sovereign and the Fatherland, but it turns out

thirdly by the fact that a large Russian army was following the French,
remembered Denísov with his changed expression, his submission, and the
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
From that day Prince Andrew began to frequent the Rostóvs’ as
expression of her father’s. His face wore that expression when his
listening to an approaching whistle in the hidden region of smoke. “One,

curiosity.
“I am not going anywhere,” Natásha replied when this was proposed to
me. And tears came into my eyes, and I was glad he noticed this. But he
“But I never told them to come,” said Princess Mary. “I only told Dron
to add:
CHAPTER IX
“Tonight, not later,” said he in a low voice, and he moved away

The commander of the regiment, a thin, feeble-looking old man with a
their sufferings. Deprived of power and authority, his crimes and his
story of the misfortunes of some Mary Víktorovna or other. At the
that bliss. To love one’s neighbors, to love one’s enemies, to love
conduct that enormous orchestra.
“It’s ready, Miss,” said the maid, holding up the shortened gauze
freedom, she begged Princess Mary to forget everything and forgive her
punished, it means that we have deserved it, it’s not for us to judge.

let Princess Mary pass into the room before her, the princess felt the
Kutúzov sighed deeply on finishing this paragraph and looked at the
trembled nervously; this was sufficient to cause his whole body to slip
camp, and himself a young general without a wrinkle on his ruddy face,
words, apart from what meaning they conveyed, were less audible than the
paced up and down the large hall. I wished to meditate, but instead my

Moscow, spoke of the direction the army should take in its retreat.
white hands—the fate of Russia. Prince Andrew was struck by the
cannot imagine how it shocked me. We were not an exemplary couple,” he
chief himself needs sleep and refreshment to maintain his energy and
a paper in his hand, and called over all the Russians there, naming
of a kind then just coming into fashion.
noiselessly.
so the countess had been sent for. Pierre saw the distracted count, and

question he noticed that it should not have been put.
grant that in his presence I may rather see my own vileness, and behave
toward the Známenka.
lived in animals, and will go back into animals again.”
other young ladies in begging Natásha and Nicholas, who were noted for

terrible dragon, a lady distinguished not for wealth or rank, but for
his boots on again. Some built little houses of the tufts in the plowed

anew on the meaning of the phenomena of life; but knowing by experience
Pávlovna.
would make that foxy old courtier feel that the responsibility for all
notice anything.
and a page of Napoleon’s, a young lad of an old aristocratic French
you I am madly, madly, in love with you! Is it my fault that you are
now!”
“Don’t you like it?” said a laughing voice, and moderating their tones
“Ah, you are sending off a letter, Princess? I have already dispatched
road wide enough?” said he, turning to a man behind him who was not
youth, there also opened out a new and hitherto uncomprehended side of
Dron got up and was about to say something, but Alpátych interrupted

wishing to speak to anyone, mounted his bay and rode off. The others all
show sympathy with his loss, yet this reminder of Austerlitz was both
his invitation. He asked her to waltz. That tremulous expression on
but, on the contrary, tried to reassure Balashëv. It was evident that
broad cheekbones, sunken cheeks, and listless tired expressions, and
battalion commander’s horse. The horse first, regardless of whether it




the soldiers’ pipes, kitchens, and campfires, and by the carelessness of
had the air of one who has suddenly lost faith in the whole human race.
nice and affectionate to her: you’re younger than she. When he comes,
    CHAPTER X

promotion to the rank of major, and Rostóv, who had already drunk
when half Russia had been conquered and the inhabitants were fleeing to
in it a look of commiseration and perplexity.

recross to the other. At last our enemy, Buxhöwden, catches us and
of the town, stretching out and concealing one another, reminded him of

thousand and a French army of a hundred thousand have met to fight, and
“Well, you’ve told me nothing new,” and the old man repeated,
I have heard your views. Some of you will not agree with me. But I,” he

in Russia—and there the whole battle of the twenty-sixth of August took
everyone of us will go, for our father the Tsar!” he shouted, rolling
years ... then I will ask for your hand.”
it, on the crest of the opposite hill, the village of Schön Grabern


“Heaven knows what a fright might do.”
temperature was lower. He had regained consciousness that morning.
“Yes, I was thinking”—for some reason Borís could not help
Christianity itself. It taught men to be wise and good and for their
different circumstances, I cannot help recognizing that if that act had

And she set off at a run along the passage.
after Natásha’s singing he had proposed to a little girl of fifteen
change in the dressings, turning the wounded man over so that he groaned
The two Pávlograd squadrons, having crossed the bridge, retired up the
“Take it if you like,” said the officer, giving the girl an apple.


he will always say the right thing and say it well.
improvised ball, and the Rostóvs stayed on. Anatole asked Natásha for
On another page he drew a tomb, and wrote:
    * Are the pretty women.

“Are you ready?” he asked his wife, looking past her.
petty interests.”
did he say?”
“Why do you say this young man is so rich?” asked the countess,

or in human affairs, but were exclusively occupied with the mystical
excellency’s participation in the common action is highly valued by

standing beside a green caisson shouted at him, but only when the shout
Do not the very actions for which the historians praise Alexander I

repulsed by hell,” and that he had seen a child smiling at lightning

by the disorganized crowds of the French when it was numerically
therefore valued most highly. He tried to picture what would happen were
been treated in the same way, and so have others who on the plea of
“Do you hear how he’s walking?” said Tíkhon, drawing the
our aid,” said Kutúzov.

than one standing on dry ground, and that makes the actions of a man
agree,” or for variety, “I too am of that opinion,” and so on had even a

“And what does he mean by ‘One of my eyes was sore but now I am on the
quicker.... I wished to be at peace.... And what will become of me? What
“Haven’t I told you I won’t give them up?” replied Denísov.
did not know, or wish to know, of his existence and was contented and
they put the hounds into a ravine thickly overgrown with young trees.
seemed to him as though one of the soldiers near him hit him on the head
in our lack of understanding we see only our weakness and His
declaration, listened to him in silence and then told her son that he
him too, just opposite Gúryev’s house... Old Gúryev.... Oh, but
sword of Frederick the Great.
kind. Is that true?”

pretext that her aunt wished to hear him.
fully absorbed in these pursuits. When men were killed or wounded, when
from him, though she knew that already, and remarked that they might
They went through the porch and into the stable. The lieutenant
his eyes off his sister and drew breath in time with her. Sónya, as she
duties indicated to us by God Himself, and that though we might expose

the matter depended on my personal wishes, the will of His Majesty the
carried the sovereign at reviews in Russia bore him also here on the
Russian and the Austrian. The Guards, just arrived from Russia, spent
dispatch? You know everything.”

When they reached a gravel path behind the house the Frenchman pulled

meaning of true civilization, I will make generations of boyars remember
What? Feel how it beats!” He took Dólokhov’s hand and put it on his
renewed, but Princess Mary saw by his face that he knew and thought of
his saber, the soldiers all continued to run, talking, firing into the
“He’s done her to death. Killed the mistress!... Beat her... dragged her

the regiment, and how satisfied his father was with him. Berg evidently


was talking came up to listen. Berg, oblivious of irony or indifference,
and there, as he ran his fingers over the strings, something seemed to
In the same way we can never imagine the action of a man quite devoid of
most radiant looks, but even the one-year-old “Prince Nicholas” (as

a box for cards my son has brought us!”
“Sónya! What is anyone in the world to me? You alone are
coat, the traveler sat down on the sofa, leaned back his big head with
Dólokhov and looked sorrowfully at him. Denísov, Rostóv, and
Konovnítsyn had foreseen on the night of the eleventh of October began
writes... Sónya...”
up there, and some open portmanteaus and trunks stood about. Prince
if in search of something. On his way to the aunt he bowed to the little
Ivánovich, the late prince’s architect, who was living on in retirement

be surprised to hear that the reason for this is Buonaparte! The case is
my enemies, and with whom? With Steins, Armfeldts, Bennigsens, and
not get accustomed.
commander in chief with that news.
One morning Colonel Berg, whom Pierre knew as he knew everybody in
“Ah, ours! And there?...” Pierre pointed to another knoll in the
and that he was neglecting one of the first rules of Freemasonry by not
Natásha saw there was nothing to be afraid of and so she braved even
goot to come to ze front and see dat zis position iss no goot? I don’t
sound of wheels and footsteps heard by the outposts during the night,
oldest rose. Márya Dmítrievna paused at the door. Tall and stout,
“When I told him that duty and the oath were above everything, he
answered him either by a brief but appropriate remark—showing that it
were sitting at embroidery frames while a third read aloud. It was the
a white vest, and the St. Andrew ribbon over his shoulder. He was riding
A shrewd, kindly, yet subtly derisive expression lit up Kutúzov’s podgy

“How I should have loved him!” said Natásha, immediately guessing
with her. He kissed her hand and addressed her not as thou but as
than her. She knew that for the Pénza estates and Nizhegórod forests
concern of his. In the regiment, everything was definite: who was
swaying, came to a stop. The carriage steps clattered as they were let
to influence Alexander, and Pfuel’s whole plan was abandoned and the
room when “Uncle” returned from the chase. “Uncle” was fond of
expenditure on those preparations and the need of obtaining advantages
same question. “Will Papa be back soon?”
dandling him. A blissful bright smile was fixed on the baby’s broad face
“The prince says nothing about that,” he remarked gently.
everything in perfect order, only one little thing is lacking, namely,
The countess exchanged glances with Anna Mikháylovna. The latter
been dreadful for him, but he understood it differently. He thought it
diminished income. The burning of Moscow had cost him, according to the
    CHAPTER VII
“Go, go to him. He is asking for your hand,” said the countess,
when she again smilingly said to him, “Well then, remember!” he drew her
The father and mother came into the room and gave the betrothed couple
muttered something and colored.
meaning of all Pierre’s mental travail.
Pierre.
stood open. Grass had already begun to grow on the garden paths, and
could she see him? But after she had been told that she could not see
slight noise at the door to attract his attention, but Pierre did not
from the truth in describing the condition of an army) and this is what
“Why, you said yourself you don’t want even to see her. She is a very

while Kutúzov is described by foreigners as a crafty, dissolute, weak
was looking with curiosity at his huge unmilitary figure.
Russian.
“At eight hundred leagues from France, I will not have my Guard
Rostóv followed them. In front of him walked Kutúzov’s groom leading
out from behind the clouds, and the clear sound of the solitary shot
The dirty maidservant stepped from behind the trunk, put up her plait,
Prince Andrew considered possible contingencies and formed new projects

understand. How is it you have loved a man for a whole year and

could no longer be averted but was taking its course independently of
We killed a score or so of ‘more-orderers,’ but we did no harm else....”
answering unexpectedly gave a sob, being evidently greatly moved.
shrieking were heard from different sides.
profligacy. Illuminism is not a pure doctrine, just because it is
connect the effects with the causes. If we examined simple actions and
felt the tension of the amorous air in the house, and also noticed a
father has a German valet, and he is a splendid valet and satisfies your
Emperor.
before, a soldier was lying athwart the rows of scented hay, with his
to move in the highest circles Borís had made it his habit to watch

must remain hidden from thee, but live so that thou mayest be ready for

army were like the plan of a market gardener who, when driving out of
passed along the Sadóvaya Street the carriages and carts formed two rows


game, the officers saw some wagons approaching with fifteen hussars on
activity of men and their historical movements, just as such a
opinion concerning the queer husband of “the most distinguished woman



contemporaries who so condemn this measure which merely re-establishes
“Dunyásha, send Alpátych, or Drónushka, or somebody to me!” she said,

as they were of defeat. If Bennigsen insisted on the position being
his wife said—met for supper at Prince Vasíli’s. All these friends


apparently suffering more than the dying soldier, and he rode away.
son of Nun. To the defenders of the laws of Copernicus and Newton, to
which he had hoped to reawaken by caressing the boy and taking him on
feeling amazed themselves at what they had done.
“I want to become a Moscovite too, now,” said Hélène. “How is it

began speaking clearly and definitely. Reasons were found for the
Rhetor went away, leaving him to solitary meditation. “It must be so,
something was still stretching out, and the candle with its red halo
which they had given out to the prisoners to make up into boots and
the Emperor.”

see whether it was firmly plaited, and grasping his by the hand. “The
coincided with it.
“Pierre was right when he said one must believe in the possibility of
lady.
The struggle between the old views and the new was long and stubbornly
happened only when, as was the case that day, her husband returned home,

destiny of our adored monarch. He will save Europe!”

temptations of the devil and Princess Mary knew it. She knew that the


it is those who submit to the power. But as the moral activity is

At this a sudden change evidently took place in the princess’ ideas;

Historians of the third class assume that the will of the people

He stretched out his hand to take hold of the purse. Rostóv let go of
drunken camp, a name the whole army gave to their encampment there,
unpleasantly and he replied hastily.
and insignificant people. But the army, the Russian army, everyone

a convoy. Directly opposite to him came a strange one-horse vehicle,
Count Kochubéy did not finish. He rose, took Prince Andrew by the arm,
apologetically. “Christ be with you, sir! May God preserve you!” said
The French patrol was one of those sent out through the various
“Arguing? Mutiny!... Brigands! Traitors!” cried Rostóv unmeaningly in a
   What is this bliss that makes my fingers thrill?
him all the way. He thought angrily of the pleasure he would have at
“The count is suffering physically and mentally, and apparently you
“It’s nothing, Mamma, really it’s nothing; only Pétya startled
elders and Nicholas, who had also come to the table. “My God, my God!
a wild beast.... In Poland, if you please, he nearly killed a Jew.”
a good friend, an adjutant general and an excellent fellow, Prince
relation of the people to their rulers.
an amusement—almost a pastime,” said Pierre. “For instance, he is

“Yes, capitally.”
peculiar glow that came into Prince Andrew’s eyes and by his silence,
today?” was his first thought. “And I did not know this suffering

Pierre knew that Makár Alexéevich was Joseph Bazdéev’s half-insane
was safe from Cossacks.
this scrap of earth, but have lived and shall live forever, there, in
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
“Well?” he asked.



“They give little hope,” replied the prince.
the same an incompetent who was unable to do anything in 1807 and who
bayonets. But whether they were moving or stationary, whether they were
“Dmítri,” said Rostóv to his valet on the box, “those lights are
Several of the men, with bright kindly faces, stopped beside Pierre.
whispering, and betraying by every word and movement that they none
grand is bad. Grand is the characteristic, in their conception, of some
one another, laughing, and shouting.
a look with Sónya.


but remained in deserted Moscow ever in the same state of agitation,
shoulders. He was looking through a field glass down the highroad before

yelling, and puffing.
called him this morning?”
aren’t you? Whose child is it?” they asked him.
Is that what you’re here for? Nothing’s cleared away down there and


a freak of fate made the impossible possible. The success of the trick
drowsiness overpowered him, red rings danced before his eyes, and the
advised me not to avoid intercourse with the Petersburg Brothers, but
away. There was never a dinner or soiree at the club without him. As
“if you have been lying I’ll have you hanged like a dog; but if it’s
Pale and agitated, Natásha ran into the drawing room.
“Ah, I’m so sorry I wasn’t there when you met the children,” said
(Natásha knew all about such things as festering) and the doctor had
three tents with flaps turned back, pitched at the edge of a birch wood.
red....”
another, and the sound of hundreds of seemingly merry French voices
turn for an audience showed embarrassment and servility; the faces of
at the place where a familiar portrait hangs. “Sorrow is sent by Him,
“Will there be any orders, your honor?” he asked Denísov, holding his
Dórokhov’s suggestion. Kutúzov did not consider any offensive necessary.
that it would soon pass if only the coachman went to the chemist’s in
fire. Toward two o’clock the regiment, having already lost more than
And immediately Túshin, with a short pipe in the corner of his mouth
dispositions for the battle were written down from his dictation.
the middle of the room and at the word of command, ‘One, two,’ and
of my nation.” But he continued to exert all his powers to restrain his
“Bosse! Vincent!” Pétya cried, stopping outside the door.

Napoleon preferred to supply them with money with which to purchase food
we find that a command is executed only when it is related to a
The doctor glanced at his watch.
suggestion and pressed his lips to the large boned, fleshy hand. Neither
mass. Looking down over the rails Prince Nesvítski saw the rapid, noisy
shoulders and glanced at Nicholas.
And the commander, turning to look at the adjutant, directed his jerky
“It can’t be!” said Rostóv. “It must have been someone else.”
that, it means that I loved him from the first. It means that he is
“She has come to stay with me,” said Princess Mary. “The count and
that these drawings represented the love adventures of the soul with its
At dinner Anna Mikháylovna talked the whole time about the war news
“Oh, my bower new...!” chimed in twenty voices, and the castanet
by his talk with Murat, he did not rise or even stir, but scowled still
now regain the feeling he then had, but was tormented by the question
would be easier to see people coming along it. “Follow me!” said he,

“Well, young cavalryman, how is my Rook behaving?” he asked. (Rook
grew and passed from one instrument to another. And what was played was
were old, creep slowly about without trying to hinder the robbers,
cart and remained motionless a long while sunk in thought. Suddenly he
stopped Pierre asking if he did not know French.

evening.

very hour that Kutúzov was reviewing the troops for the first time. He

moment of meeting had been so beatific that his present joy seemed
“Oh no, we are good friends with him,” said Nicholas in the simplicity
“Why are you wandering about like an outcast?” asked her mother.
They had hardly ridden up a hill, past a tavern, before they saw a group
was agreed that whoever became “King” should have the right to kiss Mary
though she were grown up, was evidently very proud of this but at the
little creature, but dared not do so. He stood over him, gazing at his
“Stop this jesting,” he said.
when they encounter anyone who shows animation, is to flaunt their own
“I don’t know when I began to love her, but I have loved her and her
a larger guard had been allotted to that baggage train than to the

“A fine little bitch, that!” said he in a careless tone. “Is she


the little washing wharf, torn from its place and half submerged, was
Borís looked at his general inquiringly and immediately saw that he was


Mikháylovna regarded the refined sadness that united her son to the
he remarked:
indiscretion, nodded and said: “I hope to see you again, but I also
that he could scarcely breathe, and everybody shouted, “Hurrah! hurrah!

When I understood what he wanted—when I saw that he was preparing a bed

slanting lines that filled the air like the cobwebs that float about in
me to inquire into the position of affairs,” he added.
the cone and its base. The soldier himself does the stabbing, hacking,
face assumed the coarse, unpleasant expression peculiar to him. Shaking
still farther ahead a dark line which he could not see distinctly but
without a battle.

He opened his eyes and looked up. The black canopy of night hung less
less than you do, but be a man!”
Closing his eyes, he bowed à la française, without taking leave, and
Nicholas, following her example, would sob, and without permission would
below the horizon and an evening frost was starring the puddles near
“Rostóv, where are you?”
said, of a wife who was a celebrated beauty and of millions of money.
Sónya’s first. He had read only a few lines when he turned pale and his
Eh, Dmítri! Gallop off to our Moscow estate,” he said to the factotum
rubles at a time, to talk about not wishing to cringe to anybody and not


the half-closed eyes was there greedily gnawing a mutton bone, and the

ancient times has occupied the best human minds and from most ancient
the whip who had sighted the hare.

dolls and who was still having lessons.
for the cup was an hussar who wanted a drink; but he neither knew nor

our dear Count Vrbna, goes to him for orders.”
“Sire, will you allow me to speak frankly as befits a loyal soldier?” he
report of a subordinate, now looking aside and now gazing straight into
smile on his lips change.
the right charm. He catches him and catches him—no good! He turns into
people who hated her, in order to pray for them. She included among her
you!” cried Denísov, gleeful and yet angry, his white teeth showing
only conditionally on carrying out the program that the will of the

upon an opportunity to play a rubber with Count Rostóv as a most
by one or ran away, and drove or walked toward the “warm rivers.” Many
and with marked solemnity and stiffness accompanied her to the anteroom.
overcame them. They all rushed forward to the bridge, onto it, and

“Why aren’t you beginning, Michael Ilariónovich?” said the

The spot chosen for the duel was some eighty paces from the road,
his wealth, and being in the habit of lording it over these people, he
the late Emperor, and was nicknamed ‘the King of Prussia.’ He is
father with a laugh.
When the flame of the sulphur splinters kindled by the tinder burned
done as one of them said. He ordered it. There we have command and power
time but its historic results.
was also a yellow, wrinkled old man, without beard or mustache,
spite of his money. They wanted to introduce him to me, but I quite



“I’ve taken twansports from the infantwy by force!” he said.
Bagratión, a gaunt middle-aged man of medium height with a firm,


young man he did not know, with a peculiar cross hanging from his
ruminated. “Not I, of course. I had everything ready. I had Moscow
deception. Whatever he tried to be, whatever he engaged in, the evil and
CHAPTER VIII
sovereign himself.


followed, Balashëv, who more than once lowered his eyes, involuntarily
CHAPTER XVIII

disastrous was about to happen.
The old man, experienced in court as well as in military affairs—this
the silence, asked him how he liked Moscow. She asked the question and
“Andrew, don’t!” said Princess Mary.
distinguished air which inspired respect. Princess Anna Mikháylovna
cost her no effort to forgive him. Could he be to blame toward her, or
appointment to London was a promotion and that he was so to regard it.
creaking of her corset as she moved. He did not see her marble beauty
according to all the rules of the art of fencing. The fencing has
flight. Here and there among the cells containing dead brood and honey
with grief, though he tried hard to hide it in order not to sadden his
the Saltánov dam being “a Russian Thermopylae,” and of how a deed worthy
his life he had loved and still loved only one woman, and that she could

so delighted...” came the sounds of animated feminine voices,
been attacked by French cavalry and that, though the attack had been

general to a patriotic war. And by this visit of the Emperor to Moscow
mentioned their age. “If you marry it will be a different thing,”
“Then allow me to express your regrets, and I am sure your opponent
smile what I had learned and gained in the Prussian and Scottish lodges.
did Pierre cease to feel how sordid and humiliating were all mundane
all like a girl in love and parted from her affianced husband. She was
Pierre came up to him and caught him by the arm.

indefinite. Then all preferred listening to speaking.
“little Nicholas can’t go out today, it’s very cold.”
only saw her daughter’s face in profile. That face struck her by its
struck by the presence of French officers in Borís’ lodging, dressed


“Well, and to whom did you apply about Bóry?” asked the countess.

heard the nurse calling her and went to the nursery. Countess Mary

eyes attracted him irresistibly.
was, as it were, a war trophy. Nicholas felt this, it seemed to him
supporting him. At that meeting he was struck for the first time by

Paulucci, as the Emperor mounted the steps and noticing Prince Andrew
“No, I came on business,” replied Rostóv, briefly.
Natásha remained silent, from shyness Márya Dmítrievna supposed, but
The stores are empty, the roads impassable. The Orthodox begin looting,
A smile of joy and satisfaction lit up her eager face.
    CHAPTER IX
it was with this that Daniel’s voice was heard calling ulyulyu.
his noble soul peacefully to leave this...”
the highest spirits. “They can’t help liking me,” she thought.
Two officers were standing on the knoll, directing the men. On seeing

not as he had done before, but really well, and by being a perfectly

slender little girl.
“But Princess Bolkónskaya—that’s another matter. I will tell you the
felt that the battle of which he had brought tidings was far, far

He got up from his chair and went to the door.
him, stretched himself to the utmost and, watching the wolf, galloped
and not become vehement, but almost always did become vehement, scolded,

that it was not she but he was so unusually beautiful, and that that was
among that mass of dogs, and then her forepaws were on the edge of the
for aid to God and His saint.
sorry for the Emperor that he entrusts our fine army to such as he.
kissed him three times.
“Why are you here?” he asked.

But Rostóv did not listen to him.
whether he had no commission for him.
was seized by an unreasoning springtime feeling of joy and renewal. All
aim remaining for him was to effect a junction with the forces that were

feeling—her mental tranquillity was destroyed, and desires, doubts,
they who had suffered from the trampled beds.
she asked herself what distressed her, she had to admit that it was her
future with Sónya, and that was all clear and simple just because it
and a bullet whizzing high up in the mist with a plaintive sound passed


he is Uncle’s aide-de-camp, a most brilliant position. He is so
“Preparing for tomorrow, your Serene Highness—for death—they have put on
CHAPTER XXV
him with fresh vividness. Having heard at dinner that Princess Mary
dug.
great and small; Thou art God, and man cannot prevail against Thee!
the indication of intellectual activity and say that this indication is

himself with cowardice, he had not been able to do this, but with time
should awaken terrible memories in the Emperor Alexander’s mind....
again. She tried to think of something else and to pray, but could do
“But I do not know, Father!”


“When, when did the abandonment of Moscow become inevitable? When was
and squeezing desperately, had cleared off the bridge and the troops
closer bound he involuntarily became to the order. When he had joined
of history can and should follow a path contrary to that taken by other
allured him. “A splendid wife, children, a good pack of hounds, a
same commanders. The sailor rarely cares to know the latitude in which
“Hurrah!” rang the enthusiastic voices of the officers.
Sophie—I can’t repeat them—that it made the count quite ill and he
“No, and the general’s out too.”
Look what folks are saying.”
instinctively that if the hussars struck at the French dragoons now, the
I’m fond of it,” said “Uncle.”
above the aspen undergrowth and the gully with its water-worn side and
already passed. Through the terrible and deafening roar of those voices,
Pierre gave his word of honor.
humiliate her deliberately, but to show her that she was always to blame
“This establishment is dedicated to my dear mother.” Or no, it should
entrenchments. There, you see? There’s our center, at Borodinó, just
The order was to find a ford and to cross the river. The colonel of the
with her little hands to Pierre’s coat, sat on his arm gazing about

arrival and of thanksgiving for the conclusion of peace with the


Milorádovich asking whether he is to engage the French or retire. An
A week later Prince Andrew was a member of the Committee on Army

seemed loaded with a whole houseful of effects. A fine brindled cow with
“Which is it? Which is your house?” he asked.
old dog with its felted hair hanging from its thigh was within five
“A skillful commander?” replied Pierre. “Why, one who foresees all
Natásha Rostóva!”
the pressure of the crowd with the other.
While these conversations were going on in the reception room and the
the way. Occasionally he glanced at the familiar crowd around him and
of blessedness which now flooded his heart with glad emotion.
ridiculous to give some to the drummer boy.
“And yet they say that war is like a game of chess?” he remarked.
refined ways, and the state of dove-like purity she was now in (she wore


chief’s room.
“They may. He says they may!” whispered Natásha.
Lorrain’s instructions. The German doctor went up to Lorrain.

war and the peace that had been concluded. “Yes, I have been much
the questions that had haunted him, but because his conception of her

“You did not get my letter?” he asked, and not waiting for a

Andrúsha—the slender mischievous boy who had been her playfellow in
anything of the 6th Regiment. None of them knew anything, and Pétya
tradesmen, women, and officials, looking silently at one another. The
mother, saw her agitation, and understood why her husband did not turn
“Then put off feeding them.”
On the one side reflection shows that the expression of a man’s will—his
The princess stopped. Sighs were the only sound heard in the crowd.


“It’s a pleasure to talk to a man like that; he is not like our

some song or other. They were singing discordantly, arduously, and with

One fair-haired young soldier of the third company, whom Prince Andrew

dissatisfaction, and perplexity? Who has not asked himself how it is

eighty thousand allied troops rose from their bivouacs to the hum of
on.
On the night of the eleventh of October he lay leaning on his arm and
“Well then, what do you want? You’re all in love nowadays. Well,
not pleased by Pierre’s arrival at that moment when it diverted her
little children failed to understand this and avoided her.

“Yes, really I did,” Natásha replied in a voice that pleaded to be left

hundreds of years the peasants of Borodinó, Górki, Shevárdino, and
virtue was and could not recall it.
“Buonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth. He has got
3rd December
down the wax, the seal, and the paper, with his accustomed rapidity.
bewail disasters they feel they have themselves occasioned. Márya
a complex and difficult process of internal development was taking place

marshal; he pressed the hands of some and nodded to others. His adjutant
She already had power over him, and between them there was no longer any
well aware that he was attracting everyone’s attention, yet as much at
generals. But one could not tell from that significant look whether he
words with vague yet joyful ideas. The door opened and someone came in.

He looked up at the sky. And the sky was a fairy realm like the earth.

of a subject, she did not stop talking, but chattered about the

notions of Antichrist, the end of the world, and “pure freedom.”

black eyebrows and the extraordinarily soft, bright color of her long,
campaign he had prevented their vanquishing Napoleon, that he thought of
contrary. What did it matter to him—who then alone amid a senseless
circumstances and persons he met. Of these plans he had not merely one
only reached the quarter where Pierre was staying by the evening of the
the father said, looking ironically at his son, “I beg you to put it


sank in. To make quite sure of the firmness of the ground, he put
man to consider the nature of the danger and the means of escaping it;

the soldiers blindfolded them, drawing the sacks over their heads, and
problems of motion which used to appear insoluble.
had come straight from the bath... Papa used to...”

and, returning to her hut, fell sobbing on her bed.
On the morning of the fourth of October Kutúzov signed the dispositions.
stillness of the night. Everybody near him was sleeping. A cricket
maids, had given orders to harness and intended to start, but when the
This assumption is all the more natural and inevitable because, watching


of formal demonstrations which would very soon end in peace, and the
the 18th Brumaire; was not that an imposture? It was a swindle, and not
    CHAPTER XIX
“And how I pity her mother,” she went on; “today she showed me her
the sitting room.
was about to cross the space between the barriers, when Dólokhov cried:
not. Now only the commanders of detachments with staffs, and moving
and all would have been well.”
up, now vanishing, now trembling, they were busy whispering something
was the governor’s wife herself, who welcomed Rostóv as a near relative
the possibility of peace and worked zealously to that end, and though

before the wind. It was growing lighter and lighter. That curly grass
them a paper addressed to Major Denísov from the regimental commander

were pushing back the crowd, Rostóv kept his eyes on every movement

physiognomy changed: she shuddered, seeing what she had probably never
today, and it will be tomorrow, and always; and there was yesterday, and
the Russians with but a tenth of the energy he had shown when he
been lost if he had not died. He stormed fortresses with thirty thousand

one of the Ápsheron regiment went forward past the Emperor.
Prince Andrew rode up to the house. Several limes in the old garden had
He must think that I, too, am afraid of him—and in fact I am afraid of

Bagratión as he shouted, with an expression that seemed to say: “We
“Here he is... our own... Kólya, * dear fellow... How he has
attacking French army was exhausted. Not that sort of victory which is


worse than others.”
from what was in her own heart.



not resume your former way of life. And now I wish you a good journey,
affairs and of Pierre himself in those early days. From the death of


were given in small doses), but they were useful, necessary, and
a closely written letter of two sheets from Bilíbin. He folded it up


went on in Russia at that time a special recklessness was noticeable, an
Kutúzov made a grimace and sent an order to Dokhtúrov to take over the
resolute steps toward the crowd. And the nearer he drew to it the more
attention. He screwed up his eyes showing that he was listening.
The carriage door was opened. On the left there was water—a great
He leaned his whole massive body across the table.
behind some trees on the right and saw a group of girls running to cross
“Have some brought from the reserve,” said Napoleon, and having gone
a look of glad approval on Natásha’s face.
asking for. I need only advise anything and his Highness is sure to do
Fëdorovna came in and leaned her portly person against the doorpost.
Napoleon suddenly and unexpectedly gave a new one.

the road, and heard his friend the captain reprimand and threaten to

of the carriage.
imagination he mentally compared them with Ramballe’s tales. Listening
the Raévski Redoubt, or the Knoll Battery, but Pierre paid no special
“All with grapeshot!” shouted the officer.

fact of a great man executing a duc—or even an ordinary man who—is
immortal—well then, if I shall always live I must have lived before,
Andrew. He said that Freemasonry is the teaching of Christianity freed
the face and figure of Prince Andrew, in a fur cloak the deep collar of
CHAPTER XXIII
to the destruction of Moscow—which we feared more than anything in


grumbling contempt. “You are proposing new military laws? There are

adopt toward Moscow. In his imagination he appointed days for assemblies

that the general could not refuse. But when dispatching him he recalled
over, and come back in an hour and tell me in his presence: yes or no.
his own house. The Minister of War came up and congratulated him on the
told his wife (who had ceased to smile so happily, and looked at him in
eyebrows and mustaches were smeared over the perspiring, flushed,
“Take this, little Lady-Countess!” she kept saying, as she offered

in this part of the house and did not even know of the existence of
concealing it, but the Frenchman hastily interrupted him.

Petersburg, 23rd November
“Colonel, I always require it,” replied the Emperor. “Conceal nothing
“You are speaking of Buonaparte?” asked the general, smiling.
aside, Dólokhov rode up the incline at a walk.
vanished—disappeared altogether and dissolved into nothingness.

was lying on the table. ‘Here it is! You did not write it yourself but
himself felt, that his fall was at hand. And despite his self-confidence
While this was being given, Prince Andrew heard the whisper of a woman’s
pressed against the wall of a charred house, listening to that noise
It was a portrait, painted in bright colors by Gérard, of the son borne
Soon after that a report was received from Dórokhov’s guerrilla
she ceased to ask questions or to speak at all, evidently disbelieving
on. The preoccupation and despondency which Pierre had noticed in his

“Well, are you glad?” Natásha asked. “I am so tranquil and happy
of his father’s. The field marshal made an appointment to see him,
architect’s attention to the sound of the prince’s footsteps.
teeth gleamed, brows frowned, ever the same words of abuse flew from
stones of the pavement.
them. Márya Dmítrievna talked to the count about something which they

and he shrank from beginning, afraid of exposing to possible ridicule
Natásha and the countess remained in the room. Pétya was no longer
him from his father and the neighbors. Throughout the whole province
weary of that stupid, meaningless, constantly repeated fraud? Always the

by the drawing room window all the morning as if expecting something and
really useful, as in fact they were to the whole Rostóv family. Their
now several quickly one after another. Again all was silent and then
breast, and then pushed him back and gazed at his ruddy, happy face,

nothing, and don’t want to....”


reviewed by the Emperor and other high commanders. Then came an order
asking forgiveness?”
ask; but to prove my devotion to you and how I respect your father’s


stick. Pierre, from club habit, always left both hat and stick in the
love, though less ecstatically, with their Tsar and the glory of the
“But you meant to stay another two days?”
count, with playful ceremony somewhat in ballet style, offered his
and, after discussing her plan with the aunt, remarked that though
this kept him in a state of excitement bordering on insanity.
victory, what effect would that have on the general course of events?
seldom listened; now he was seldom carried away in conversation and
addressing Pierre rapidly between her sobs. “The fire broke out
nuts (raw and roasted), and nut-and-honey sweets. Afterwards she brought
The height of happiness was reached—and so simply, without warning, or
the resulting force. To define and express the significance of this
Pierre did not stay for dinner, but left the room and went away at once.
CHAPTER VIII
September, 6, 1812.
running beside Timókhin, killed a Frenchman at close quarters and was

the soldiers, evidently afraid that Pierre might want to take from
There was only one expression on her agitated face when she ran into the
the retreat from Austerlitz, where he alone had withdrawn his column
and strength of the class of men he mentally classed as they. When

“What companion, my dear boy? Eh? You’ve already been talking it over!
the soldiers’ faces and unnatural warlike solemnity on those of the

possession of him. He felt that the condition he was in could not
this indecision appeared to him majestic and enchanting, like everything
expressed impetuosity and enthusiasm. Nicholas blushed when he entered
came into her head, but what she had invented then seemed to her now
only six tumblers of water, but this made it all the pleasanter to
face.
    CHAPTER I

and he turned inquiringly to Balashëv, and evidently this thought turned
Not only on that day, as he rode over the battlefield strewn with men
hundred thousand. Yet the shrewd and experienced Kutúzov accepted the

of the advance. As soon as an Austrian officer showed himself near
When Paris was mentioned, Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seized the
“Yes, he is very handsome,” thought Pierre, “and I know him. It

think could hardly be found nowadays—but is she contented with her
But behind the veil of smoke the sun was still high, and in front and
his influence with the commander in chief to induce him to take the
greatcoat. “Peter Petróvich!” said he. (Konovnítsyn did not stir.) “To
our farming! Bettah have another conscwiption... o’ ou’ men will wetu’n
had not been foreseen and was not fortified. By crossing to the other
hit him so pat, stwaight on his snout... ‘Ah, what a... what a...!’
was necessary for him to go to the count at all, still less why he had
they might be who were to blame for the false and ridiculous position in

she received on Sundays.

dictatorship and Empire, or all the things that produced the French
“Oh, you fine fellows, my kind, kind friends! These are men! Oh, my

“There, Fedótov, you should be quartered on them!”
in former years, that is, entertaining almost the whole province with
Before returning to Bilíbin’s Prince Andrew had gone to a bookshop
winding through a thick, low-growing birch wood. In the middle of the
made use of him for his own ends.
been recommended to Prince Andrew he had already risen above the general
prince, she prepared to listen.
On all sides they saw rain-soaked officers with dejected faces who
While saying this he never removed his smiling eyes from her face,
impatiently awaiting the order to mount. His face, having been bathed
the moment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with glad,
men to flush.
awakening, she embraced her friend, but noticing Sónya’s look of

everyone tried to get a glimpse of the projectiles as they flew over
better during those awful moments—the father who so remembered
them had ever been. They set off in caravans, bought their freedom one
“She is not very well,” answered Mademoiselle Bourienne with
she had seldom experienced, came upon her. She feared to look round, it
husband of a beauty, and in a word—an old woman; and secondly because
looking and held out his hand to her. She pressed it.
drowning Uhlans who distracted his attention.
standing in the stirrups, trotted a Cossack. The officer, a very young
nonsense out of your head.”


thirteen more men he will be three times as strong as I am.
scratch from one paragraph to another with his hard nail.

Bennigsen’s note and the Cossack’s information that the left flank
escape discipline. In general they regard Smolénsk as the place where
emptied them, rolling the vodka in their mouths, and walked away from
One cannon ball, another, and a third flew over him, falling in front,
“Seriously, you’d better drop it! You’ll only get yourself into a
he fell in with the Rostóvs.... What a strange coincidence!”
“That’s what I say. Folks are foolish! Always afraid of the French.”
“Well, what would you do?” asked Denísov.
by finding husbands for me (most of whom I don’t even know), the
purse and, drawing its rings aside with his small, white, turned-up
Anatole embracing the Frenchwoman and whispering something to her. With
in the Gáchina suburb across the Dnieper, at the inn kept by Ferapóntov,
him almost the status of a hero. And Pierre felt that their opinion
Bennigsen, but only the one most essential thing—as much advantage
the Tsar-cannon. Several people were sorry for Pétya, and suddenly a
But when on Sunday after church the footman announced in the drawing
placed responsibilities upon him.
all saw Pierre—or someone extraordinarily like him—in a coachman’s coat,

unselfishly in love with Nicholas, that there were no grounds for
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
peasants, did not bring their hay to Moscow for the high price offered

father to be a connection of Prince Vasíli’s. The elderly lady who
did it all.”
brothels,” and with these words Márya Dmítrievna, turning up her wide
during the whole campaign, and left the broken ranks of the soldiers

After passing some Austrian troops he noticed that the next part of the

hardly able to bear. Though the diplomatists still firmly believed in
events, remembrance of remote ones, and the childish vanity with which

with the little cap on its unsteady head evidently absorbed all his
himself on the drunkard. Just when Pierre snatched at and struck up the
and extending its neck, galloped on yet faster. Hardly had the Horse
    CHAPTER XVI
says senseless things that should have ruined him. But the once proud
should make too good a target for the French, besides I am afraid I



could she help loving Nicholas and knowing that his happiness depended
CHAPTER XIV
my legs fail, and I’ll lie down and die somewhere, and shall at last
lit room adjoining the count’s reception room. It was one of those

though she was lying on the ground—she grabbed at some biscuits but
No betrothal ceremony took place and Natásha’s engagement to
Count Ilyá Rostóv separately, as the organizer of the banquet. At that
the dresses would not be ready, or that something would not be arranged
Princess Mary walked up and down the room and stopped in front of him.
ball flew past. Evidently they were firing at the hussars, but the balls
Russian officers and generals after the Tarútino battle, letting it be
be called back to life from that realm of sorrow in which she had dwelt
touching Bonaparte’s.
headquarters. For the Pávlograd hussars, however, the whole of this
dying man, an unborn babe, or an idiot—complete absence of freedom, by

disturbed that day, evidently by the fact that they had dared to inspect
On the Pratzen Heights, where he had fallen with the flagstaff in his
but could only spoil and lower the glorious position that Russia had
talent and virtue: raising worthy men from the dust and attaching




away at the dogs! But this sort of thing is the very devil, with them
Gavríl to pay a sleigh driver, his kissing Sónya on the sly—he now
myself not long ago, in Moscow and when traveling, but at such times I
what was passing in Lóbnoe Place that no one answered him. The stout man

son’s arrival: he gave orders to admit him to his apartments while
new mustache. “Now then, get on,” he shouted to the driver. “Do
a whisper and four more Uhlans left the ranks and placed themselves on
still aware of that smell of decomposing flesh that had been so strong

returned, and the faithful, unalterable love of this girl had a
“Do you know what I am thinking about?” she asked. “About Platón
the accountant with the naïve face was feeling its texture, shaking his
is impossible. I only wish I could spare my brother the first moments.

with the others.
went out into the vestibule.

Andrúsha!...” said she, putting her hand in her reticule but not yet
“But you have not slept,” she said, repressing her joy. “Try to sleep...
After dinner the whole Rostóv household set to work with enthusiastic
Emperor, liked and respected by Alexander. Then why those severed
significance for them of the glow they were watching. Sighs were heard,
when he saw the minister seated at a large table reading some papers

still able to roll forward to Moscow, but there, without further effort
nurses who knit stockings, and that there is something soothing in
inertiæ—pressed forward into boats and into the ice-covered water and
wormwood and gentian in his hair and, gleefully rubbing his hands, would
An outsider is out of place here.... No, don’t distress yourself....

that were running past, and demanded reinforcements which did not
and following them others, consider this flank march to be the profound
bound to happen. The countess looked with sad and sternly serious eyes
Even in the best, most friendly and simplest relations of life, praise
Learned military authorities quite seriously tell us that Kutúzov should
lying—he alone could justify what had to be done.
infinite life around him. And the closer he looked the more tranquil and
up from the sofa, seized Borís under the elbow in his quick, clumsy
defined by the capture of pieces of material fastened to sticks, called
Having talked for a little while in the general circle, Speránski rose
Russians to stop this movement, to which the French were directing all

Mademoiselle Bourienne either. Tíkhon alone attended him.

Confused and ever-increasing crowds were running back to where five
eyes, she locked her in; and having given orders to the yard porter to
intention to part from her forever.
daughter were having one not less important. Natásha came running to

electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree
which ran along the ruts in streams.

“And to drink,” said one of the officers, not wishing to quarrel.
dark chamber. I caught myself harboring a feeling of hatred toward him


drove himself, generally letting his young men do so. But with “his
Kutúzov raised his head and looked for a long while into the eyes of
“Yes, yes, thank God! Well, and what news from the army?”
surprised Pierre.
dry hands clenched with vexation at her not understanding a sum in
the dirty pond beside the Smolénsk road. Yes, it was the same flesh,
Prince Andrew had no time to answer. The servants came out to meet them,

Vincent, the boy’s name, had already been changed by the Cossacks into
not have caused him to expect that honor. The prince, who generally kept
them, his mind had penetrated to those distances and he had there seen
as merely a hindrance and obstacle to the impending war.

you don’t fall off your horse,” he added, “because—that’s it,
He took some gold pieces from his trouser pocket and put them on the
as unsuitable from every point of view, the battleground he had not



oneself or walks about to get rid of stiffness, and the sounds were
treated her husband in a friendly and conspiratorial style, as if,
all on one plan, for hospitals, schools, and almshouses, which were soon
Dmítri, and several acquaintances, and the countess reread the letter
One of the generals rode up to Napoleon and ventured to offer to lead
freedom.
generals were saying.

landing reflected ladies in white, pale-blue, and pink dresses, with
smiled at me yesterday and asked me to come again, and I love her, and
impatient every day. The thought that her best days, which she would
After supper, over their cherry brandy, Rostóv and “Uncle” talked
We are forced to fall back on fatalism as an explanation of irrational
Natásha had tried to elope during her father’s absence, in order to be
Bald Hills and was sitting indoors reading the Lives of the Saints. On
going down the street with head bent and a serious face beside a small,

indecision.
forward, halted, and again moved on, and from all sides vehicles and men
“Where are we?” thought he. “It’s the Kosóy meadow, I suppose.
But without finishing what she was saying, Princess Mary burst into
“Well, now he’ll come away,” Pétya thought every moment as he stood by
what am I to do?” thought she, recalling all the signs that clearly
whom all the regiment knew for a rogue.
had done at the start. It was here that the prisoners for the first time
“Stop jesting,” said Prince Andrew sadly and seriously. This news
marching along both.
to have already entered Vítebsk, the old prince remembered his son’s
next room, marching stiffly, and drew up in front of Rostóv.

Ivánushka’s face, who, seeing that she was being spoken about, looked
Pierre most of all was the view of the battlefield itself, of Borodinó
The officer felt that by arriving with important orders at such a moment

At one of the post stations he overtook a convoy of Russian wounded.


At the first glance, when Davout had only raised his head from the
There were only thoughts clearly expressed in words, thoughts that
placed his hand on the gate as if to leave.
mean to fight, let’s fight. But the devil knows what this is.”
“No, you go on, I was talking nonsense,” said Natásha.
“I shall be delighted to meet them,” said the prince. “But
It was a warm, rainy, autumnal day. The wide expanse that opened out
as the right flank would probably not be able to withstand the enemy’s
convinced themselves that the hounds had separated into two packs: the

and examined him with attentive curiosity. The Cossack was dead, but the
Mary turned red and then pale, but continued to sit with head bowed and
Having similarly explained his views and his magnanimity to Tutólmin, he
the society in which Prince Andrew lived he had never seen anyone who
takes place at such moments.
last moments by not letting him commit this injustice, and not to let

their uniforms and settled down again in their homes and clubs, and not
would be sure to get his dinner, tea, and supper. But for a long time in
Natásha stepped up to the window and pondered.
ministers and great people, and know how to deal with them all! It’s
jolting the stretcher.

pushed off the road. The convoy formed up.
him.
again expressing deep sorrow.
They went through the muddy village, past threshing floors and green
“The prince is not very well: bile and rush of blood to the head. Keep
to execute an order. The officer on duty, a handsome, elegantly dressed
through openings in the earthwork.
that the whistling and the turning of wheels are the cause of the
misleading us all the week and now that he’s brought us to this pass
man with a diamond ring on his forefinger, who was fond of speaking
stationed on the Pratzen Heights.

instead to Mozháysk along the devastated Smolénsk road. Nothing more
hundred years. It seems to me that I have never loved anyone before. You

devotion to the sovereign, Rostóv pictured to himself an enemy or a
between Semënovsk and the Knoll Battery, where thousands of men perished

“Oh, how absurd you are! It is not beauty that endears, it’s love that

assembled for, which usually shows itself in an army that has been

God!”—voices among the officers were heard saying.
by a sense of horror and repulsion such as he had experienced when
“Had there been no Bagratión, it would have been necessary to
had gone to Boguchárovo, only a few remained.
The visitor made a gesture with her hand.
exception to the rule of not receiving bachelors in his house.
Moscow—filled Pierre’s soul during his convalescence. He was surprised
and began to speak.
told him, and said, “Very good!” in a tone that seemed to imply that
out of every thousand serfs, as the Smolénsk gentry had done. Their
the constrained, activity of man? That is a question for history.
inactivity of the French (who even lost sight of the Russian army),

To realize the degree of exhaustion of the Russian army it is only

evidently not wishing to join in the conversation, was looking over the
She was nursing her boy when the sound of Pierre’s sleigh was heard

Kutúzov went purple in the face, not because that officer was to blame
spent only half as much as before, and that his affairs—which had been

hussars.

similar to the Légion d’honneur of the great Emperor Napoleon, not
“A diary?” Nicholas repeated with a shade of irony, and he took up the


seat.
and from the consequent presence there of an indefinite, conditional,
his acquaintances, to overtake his regiment which was already in Poland.

“You are not wounded?” he asked.
From the time that Pierre began life as a family man on a footing

At that ball Pierre for the first time felt humiliated by the position
uninterrupted shaping of events the commander in chief is in the
“What do you think of it, Prince?” Dessalles ventured to ask.
the Rostóvs since the day of his departure for the army. To be in Anna
said Bolkhovítinov, unable to see in the dark who was speaking but
impression. “But that is a matter of perfect indifference to me,” he
Courage, my angel.” She kissed Lise and was about to leave the room.
don’t know me. We have not met for such a long time... not since we
“Yes, Princess,” said Nicholas at last with a sad smile, “it doesn’t
‘There are a lot of us,’ he says, ‘but all poor stuff—only soldiers in

“The signal!” said he.
kind of civility that this device of placing a channel was employed. He
and let Karáy spring at it—in sight of ‘Uncle’ who is watching
Pierre tried several times to speak, but, on one hand, Prince Vasíli
suffering as I am. Who then is it? Who?” flashed for an instant through
ordered the horses to be saddled. But just as Daniel was about to
certainly be happier with her than with some doll-like Julie. I can
to him. He made haste to finish buying the horses, and often became
Despite the weakness of age, which had become particularly noticeable
by individual men, and (2) the existence of a known aim to which these
chair à canon * we are ready to make of ourselves—and not to obtain from
and Frenchmen running toward it. Higher up stood some Russian infantry,

Nicholas looked at her face with surprise. It was the same face he had
soldiers of the escort had raised their muskets, fired, and run
lad’s a fine fellow, a fine fellow! Well, come with me now.” He took
The French found Moscow abandoned but with all the organizations of
were passing by. From one of the drivers he learned that Kutúzov’s
“Ah, my God! my God! When one thinks who and what—what trash—can cause
“Will they burn the bridge or not? Who’ll get there first? Will they
from the post and began pushing it into the pit.
Bilíbin was a man of thirty-five, a bachelor, and of the same circle as
“I won’t submit to your Napoleon! Others may if they please.... If you
Kutúzov’s expectations that the proposals of capitulation (which were
“Nikólenka, what is the matter?” Sónya’s eyes fixed on him
room,” he said.


“Pétya! Be quiet, I tell you!” cried the count, with a glance at his
Mademoiselle Bourienne blushing.

when the army had got there, as the result of innumerable and varying

God be with him,” thought he, relishing his own goodness of heart,
evidently wishing to end the conversation, but the flushed and excited
declares in ze manifessto zat he cannot fiew wiz indifference ze danger

said:

be separated from its supplies by the broad river Oká, which cannot be

him, there grew and strengthened in his soul a power of life independent
and consequently the rapidity and justice of his intonation had an
and who was called Tit. He was saying, “Tit, I say, Tit!”

“Whatever are you bothering about, gentlemen?” said Bilíbin, who,
loving—not only remained unchanged, but it sometimes seemed to Princess
could understand all that she understood and all there was in her.


“The ammunition for the guns in position is exhausted, Your
am really frantic with vexation; forgive my writing boldly. It is clear
much interest him because at that moment he felt with delight that he
was not an advanced post of that position, we have the fact that up to
and continual expectation of some good, always in front of him but never

Nesvítski. “They’ve made up splendid packs for me—fit to cross
the ancients insoluble. The absurd answer (that Achilles could never
face in the lace of her mother’s mantilla—not paying the least
simultaneously attacked and outflanked by superior French forces under

could and should be acquainted with people above one, because only then
dissipated by the appearance of His Highness. “She is right, but how
mentioned. Moreover, toward evening, as if everything conspired to make
everything that was good and worthy of being loved.
men, not dogs.”
“Is this the way to the princesses’ apartments?” asked Anna
and still less speak about it, but must only attend to one’s own work.
that incessantly sprang up, proving how right and strong he was (in his
she clasped her mother she always managed to do it without hurting her
had formed in France unites into one group with the peoples of Central
me, just because I have exerted myself on his behalf, befriended him,
More than anything else in Pierre’s story the captain was impressed by
peasant in the knitted cap who, stepping lightly with outturned toes
and the boyish face Rostóv, breathless with excitement and hope, was

we say that this is so because it is unthinkable otherwise, or in other
a red ball through the dust, burned and scorched his back intolerably

him Pierre, who had not been to the Rostóvs’ once since the ball.
Rostóv, he stopped short and frowned.

the Holy Virgin Mother of God.’...”


and went to meet a tall, bald, fair man of about forty with a large open



lovers!” he added.



so-called flank march across the Krásnaya Pakhrá River. They ascribe the
“The Berlin cabinet cannot express a feeling of alliance,” began
“On the contrary it’s very interesting!” replied Pierre not quite



others.
from Denísov, rode past too, at the rear of his squadron—that is,
wearing a gray peasant coat and a white knitted cap.
and peacefully.
on cloaks or mantles, and drive away. The conversation was on the chief
hospital more than fifteen thousand men, and had we attacked this would
away to God, while cruel, useless, harmful persons, or such as are a
sometimes four abreast. From all sides, behind and before, as far as ear
merchant-class—les états généraux (States-General)—evoked in him a whole
dusk. All day it had been calm and frosty with occasional lightly
to end the conversation. She knew her remarks sounded unnatural, but
of the window, he saw it was an unsurpassable morning for hunting: it
Pierre sniffed as he looked at her, but did not speak. Till then he had
“But where do you come from not to know what every coachman in the
military or not, that it was here the French should attack. It would
saw him before her with the expression that was on his face as he lay

up and change, but up to the first of September nothing had done so.
to public affairs, or possibly to family concerns.
and both parents gladly accepted this offer, for they saw their daughter
of them, and that she was not afraid of him and no one else ought to be.
gaze.
stern but handsome face really joined in the dance. What was expressed
“Well, now, good-by!” He gave his son his hand to kiss, and embraced

hot,” in reference to Count Arakchéev. One general (an important
lay down on his bed groaning and loudly exclaimed, ‘My God!’ Why didn’t

through the naïve and intelligent count and played with him as with

“I saw you riding this morning...” he added.

know! When she comes spluttering down, out go your innards. One can’t
“Well, why are you going to the war?” asked Pierre.
you? I love you madly. Can I never...?” and, blocking her path, he
to him and disputed with one another who should bring him his tea,
supposed, but by the activity of all the people who participate in
“Wait, I must...”
behind, though more than a hundred perished in that way. He did not
terrible to look at than before. However, he did not look at them now,
Natásha would have had no doubt as to the greatness of Pierre’s idea,
and were taking up, or preparing to take up, their positions for the
street to the knoll from which he had looked at the field of battle the
had he not been hindered, first, by his membership of the Society of
with him. I must tell you, mon cher,” he continued in the sad and

presented to him thus with the simplicity of Columbus’ egg. He was
quitrents. Of what is she thinking? Why is she so happy?” Prince
feeling of devotion returned to him even more strongly than before. When
Then Nicholas sang a song he had just learned:
“The militia have put on clean white shirts to be ready to die. What

had now become absolutely necessary and inevitable. He must remain in

supposed, must have risen to fifteen thousand. In reality it already
consummate coquette, she could not have maneuvered better on meeting a
his feelings were like those of a conjuror who always expects his trick
to herself, and rushing at him embraced him, pressed his head to her
aware of a stir all around. He looked up: Dólokhov was standing on the

direction of the conflagration. As if urging each other on, the soldiers
himself, was shouting to Kutúzov that if he did not ride away at once
memory of the distant past. He felt himself not only free from social
serve him. Rostóv patted the horse’s neck and then his flank, and
several times up and down the room, his fat shoulders twitching.

ran into Ferapóntov’s yard before Alpátych’s eyes. Alpátych went out

the conversation to insignificant matters. Natásha, who, of the whole
“What? What? How dare you? What?” said Telyánin.
“Ah, it’s you!” said Pierre with a preoccupied, dissatisfied air.

“Princess!”
day be mine forever, as familiar to me as I am to myself?... No, that’s
recognizes (and can but recognize) as free.
losses. The general whose regiment had been inspected at Braunau was

and accept the offer,” but before he had time to say it Natásha began
what reasoning the historians reach the conclusion that this maneuver
In the midst of this conversation, which was beginning to interest

was all he thought about yesterday’s ball, and after his morning tea

should now be away in a foreign land amid strange surroundings, a manly

He showed an interest in trifles, joked about de Beausset’s love of
again getting in front of the first line as he had done when the Horse
make things easy for or reward anyone, merely because he felt inclined

not exactly hear his words but understood them from the movement of his
campfires—the soldiers’ kitchens.
“I don’t know. I think if he writes, I will write too,” she said,
Emperor?”

“The marshal, a Count Rostóv, hasn’t sent half his contingent. He

his career. Moreover, he could see by her manners that she was one of
the meaning of power, seem to consider that the collective will of
hoofs and shouts were nearing the village.

knowing the causes of the act and the simplicity of the character and

him, feel his eyes on her now that her whole soul was overflowing with
unreasonable character.
After arranging his clothes, he took the pistol and was about to go out.
    CHAPTER XVI
sharp, but toward evening the sky became overcast and it began to thaw.
that episode as of some childish, long-forgotten matter that was not
bursts of song and music and the inconsequent but friendly prattle of
white daylight of his clear perception of death. “There they are, those
said: “Nothing but misfortune can come of marrying Sónya. Muddles,
future.
himself honored with his visits, regarding Hélène as a remarkably
moaning sounded terrible in the darkness of the autumn night. He had
dissipation, associated with his old Petersburg comrade Kurágin and


caused by the position of the hands of the watch.
him. Though nothing of the kind had happened to her she was regarded in
since yesterday. She must be told! Then at least she won’t go on

If the aim of the European wars at the beginning of the nineteenth

and yet you are willing to negotiate.”
Halfway through supper Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the table and,
your eyes,” added Willarski. “I wish you courage and success,”
thing.”

Kutúzov replied: “I should be cursed by posterity were I looked on as
not talk, but act. The spoken word is silver but the unspoken is golden.
﻿
convulsions and that we know only the facts—that is, the murders, first
previously sent; and a spy, a prisoner, and a general who has been
and, walking backwards before the company, jerked his shoulders and

is, by regarding it as an infinitely small quantity, can we convince
“I only came in to look and did not notice... forgive me....”
questions. He seemed grieved that Pierre had no parents, especially that
impossible not to notice his face. Dólokhov was a man of small means
the abandonment of the city in which her greatness is centered and in
house was scrubbed and cleaned on Saturdays; neither she nor the
darling, it’s not the thing. Please forgive me, darling.... Mamma, what
time.... But what about me? You might at least have shown consideration
The princess gave no reply and did not even smile, but left the room as
speak so to me. Because Sónya is poor I must not love her,” he

junction advisable, meant, among other arguments in support of his view,
army corps. The progress of the war was eagerly followed, and only
be appointed chief of the artillery, Kutúzov replied: “Yes, I was
ground like cliffs and slopes. Anywhere, on any side, one might
here? Don’t you see the skirmishers are retreating? Lead the squadron




finally and decisively. “It is not enough for me to know what I have
He is needed for the place that awaits him, and so almost apart from
without it. ‘When wood is chopped the chips will fly.’” He looked at the
every time there has been a revolution in any state there have been
best families in Russia, but she was poor, and having long been out of
father.
battle will depend and not on those others.... Success never depends,
kerchief, and the loose skin that hung under her chin.

occurs: a backwash which serves to solve the apparently insuperable

her seemed to Princess Mary, and sorry as she was to see her agitation,
everything, only I have nothing....”
The old servant returned to the calèche, looked into it, shook his
with the air of an old brigadier.


his pocket, left the shed.
another horse lay, like Pierre, on the ground, uttering prolonged and
stood waiting by the door.
I am afraid of him.”
so long waited, presents itself to him at last. He firmly and clearly

CHAPTER XX

another! Again! It has hit....” He stopped and looked at the ranks. “No,

A bed had been made on a bedstead for the countess only. Madame Schoss
he accepted a post in Moscow in that service, doffed the uniform of
“The limits of human life ... are fixed and may not be
resolve when he had last visited Bald Hills, though he had spoken of it
it were a flail.
she said with external dignity and coldness, though she felt the tears
assumed a dignified expression, which with characteristic tact she had
Michaud had only waited for this to bring out the phrase he had
within the limits of virtue. Our order should provide means to that end.
had been defending himself against the hussars. When Pétya galloped
Again, as at the church in Khamóvniki, a wave of general curiosity


he would not listen to it. He was even pleased by failures, for failures
sees,” said Gerásim. “Will you step into the study?” Pierre nodded. “As
Emperors. Upon them the undivided, tensely passionate attention of that
From this fundamental difference between the view held by history and

Pierre, after all, had not managed to choose a career for himself in
never considered personal danger.
about him interested them greatly. They were telling him something and
More men collected behind the wattle fence of the Eighth Company than
and a muffled shout almost behind them in the wood. The French had
answered Pierre, trying to remember who this young man was.
opinion...”
reports of the Cossacks there had previously been nobody—there were now
all that had happened to him, and above all vividly remembered the
found expression in calling her maid “my dear” and speaking to her
and glad sparkle. Prince Andrew had grown thinner, paler, and more
The men rapidly picked out their horses in the semidarkness, tightened
of the rulers of France, who submit to him; chance forms the character
Baltic Provinces—and I can live in Petersburg on my pay, and with
A painstaking police officer, considering the presence of a corpse in

sleeping at all, she watched him and, terrible to say, often watched
what he should do on his estates.
you were to order an attack! If not, the Guards will not so much as see
the house.
up their positions were clearly audible.
And Moscow engulfed the army ever deeper and deeper. When water is
no sky but only an atmosphere.”

their prisoner’s name was Count Bezúkhov?

who pursued them, continued as far as Krásnoe without a battle. The
himself suddenly freed from the ideas that had weighed him down. He felt
being beaten and finally feeling that his hands were bound and that a
but asked him meanwhile to remain on his staff. Anatole Kurágin, whom
fascinating and consequently so alarming that he was ready to run away,

“Yes, of course!” replied Davout, but what this “yes” meant, Pierre did


weep without knowing why—rode behind on his artillery nag. Though
immediately starting to run along the hall and up the warped steps of

himself by replying to such nonsense as he was now hearing. So when
any company he was in.
on his thin bony legs, and keeping on a worn, nankeen-covered, sheepskin

report—which consisted chiefly of a criticism of the position at

be that afterwards, ashamed of their false accusations, they will make
surprising news. He informed her of his engagement to Natásha Rostóva.

Princess Mary but were looking within... into herself... at something
In one company dinner was ready, and the soldiers were gazing eagerly
“Yes, I will; Pelagéya Danílovna, let me! I’ll go,” said Sónya.
that winter and, as they had come only for a short time and the countess
qualities of him who possesses it, it must evidently be looked for
deceived you. Let us go to Mamma.”
escorted him to the door, repeating something to him several times in
Vasíli interrupted, “but they did not listen to me. I told them his

“Wasn’t it fine when those Germans gave us lifts! You just sit still





collective will of all the animals is transferred from one leader to
Borodinó had been a victory, he alone—who as commander in chief might
The orderly was striking a light and Shcherbínin was fumbling for

“What a clever man your father is,” said she; “perhaps that is why
son.”
“Yes, in these days it would be hard to live without faith...” remarked

His daughter placed chintz-covered down cushions for him to sit on and


and a thousandth corporal and private also refused, there would have
rapid steps to the village.
“I cannot pay it all immediately. Will you take an I.O.U.?” he said.
“Father,” she said, “do not turn away from me, let us weep
become of him if Natásha didn’t keep him in hand.... Have you any idea
his lifted hand with a bright and proud smile.

was sprinkling Eau de Cologne on the Emperor’s pampered body with an
“Mamma!... Mamma!... He has made me...”
He entered through the gates with their stone pillars and drove up
and immediately, hearing behind him the tramp of the horses of his
consciousness that they had captured part of the battlefield and had
“What else do you expect?” answered the soldier. “She has no mercy, you
he has such capital things. I bought ten pounds. I am used to something
smiling. “Cela nous convient à merveille.*(2) Suvórov now—he knew

unmarried, liked him because without making love to any of them, he was
received all Petersburg, proud of her unapproachability and beauty. So
him with greedy expectation. “I can always arrange so as not to see
special enclosure to feed and that becomes twice as fat as the others
was about to run on, thinking that the farther he went to the front
Pierre was shown into the large, brightly lit dining room; a few minutes
plump, well-nourished body. The fourth was a peasant, a very handsome
“Why, are you a soldier then?”
had petitioned the Emperor to make him a German. The men of that party,

for Princess Mary, she signed it, and it was given to Alpátych with
Vereshchágin, is the scoundrel by whose doing Moscow is perishing.”
more, for immediately afterwards cannon began firing from somewhere and
the village letting the troops pass by him. That morning Kutúzov seemed
Rostóv fancied he had seen before) rode up to the ditch, struck his

answer to his doubts and to confirm the fact that now he understood and
Mason.
“It’s all the same now. If the Emperor is wounded, am I to try to
Why doesn’t the Frenchman stab him? He will not get away before the
is so kindhearted that she can’t look at blood, but enjoys eating the
dreamed that she saw her sons lying dead. After many consultations and
Andrew struck the high road along which the Russian army was moving with
moaned piteously and, exchanging looks, they set him down again.
rushing at the cadet to restrain him.
undecided as to who ought to be appointed commander in chief. One of the
gazed silently in that direction.
Mary. They had evidently both formed the same resolution; the eyes of

carefully guarded their open wounds from any rough and painful contact.
expected anything from Speránski and from any of his own activities
wars, revolutions, and conquests—are presented by these historians
and the orders he gave them and, to his surprise, found that no orders
action, and more than that, you can’t make me believe that you do not
happening in home and foreign affairs.


of love and sadness. It was plain that she was following a train of
be paid for anything taken from them. As proof of this the peasant had
“Yes, that is true, Prince. In our days,” continued
lower floor.


she had never been able to be quite frank, had now become unpleasant to
Pierre’s way led through side streets to the Povarskóy and from there

On inquiry, the countess learned that Madame Schoss was offended because

arrange it,” and she rushed forward so that the maids who were tacking
a glimpse of her, she seemed still more lovely. She was a charming girl
him, but stood frowning by the door of the hut.
your hands.” He spoke as if those bullets could not kill him, and his
though nothing had happened, yet the former purity of her love for
“Don’t talk nonsense!” cried Márya Dmítrievna.
him, and her look asked only one thing: was he a friend, or like the
maid of honor’s hand to his lips, kissed it, and swung it to and fro
looking like something between a cart, a cabriolet, and a calèche.
here.”
Rostóv, flushing, drew Dólokhov into the next room.
plunder the city; then, hesitating whether to leave a garrison behind
and out of the bedroom glanced at the princess and turned away. She did
“We are enjoying ourselves! Vasíli Dmítrich is staying a day longer
to cruel with his subordinates, and went into everything down to the
blazing briskly. The walls were all on fire and the back wall had fallen
Emperor himself, thus cutting the ground from under the commander in
voice, and he began scraping his dirty feet on the threshold.

education of the young, unite ourselves in indissoluble bonds with the
“Thank you, Princess,” he added softly. “Sometimes it is hard.”
Only now did Pierre realize the full strength of life in man and the
astonishment pushed back again.

“It would not be turned off the field even on the Tsarítsin
“But how get married?” said Pierre, in answer to Márya Dmítrievna. “He
comrades’ impression. Every face, from Denísov’s to that of the
his husbandry.

and saw no interest in imagining how it would be if things were
but how can I harness everything?” and Pierre felt with horror that the
deigned to speak to him.

it there would have been nothing unintelligible in the history of that
goods.”
Dron on the contrary retired to the rear and the crowd drew closer
Torzhók estate with the children, your excellency.”
who remained behind, and the monotonous tramp of thousands of feet
and back, galloped strenuously forward, and with a dashing salute reined
of these maneuvers that enabled us to escape him. Buxhöwden pursues
time, wondered at his enjoyment and regretted that there was no one to
nice indeed, quite French,” and he kissed the tips of his fingers.
different.

an army of a million and only a miracle could save Russia.
occupation of the town of Wischau and the capture of a whole French
stretching out and beating her head against the wall. Sónya and the
gleam.
The chief steward expressed great sympathy with Pierre’s intentions,
to set off. That she had not heard from Prince Andrew himself, Princess
what these men, who were dragging something out, were about; but seeing
angry with the travelers and would immediately turn them out, had she
The bullets having spared you, do you want to try typhus? This is a
victory or defeat, the glory of our Russian arms is secure. Except your
countess and Natásha, and about albums and fancywork with Sónya.
but the feeling is stronger than I. Yesterday I tormented myself and
All were then more confident of victory than the winning of two battles
forward. Karáy, his hair bristling, and probably bruised or wounded,
as their officer—all looked at their commander like children in an
to Napoleon in 1809, when our army in alliance with the French went to
some in the sitting room, some in the library.
BOOK ELEVEN: 1812
Anatole came up to her. She still could not see him. She only felt a
silent. Kutúzov slightly shook his head and not taking his penetrating
After his losses, he had determined to pay back his debt to his parents



repeated by others from various sides and all became silent.
and disheveled, beat and turned the heavy feather bed for the third
felt herself a being accidentally forgotten in this world and left
ago have joined the archduke. And believe me on my honour that to me
Three large rooms were assigned to them in the monastery hostelry, one
toes toward the general. The captain’s face showed the uneasiness of
It was plain that l’amour which the Frenchman was so fond of was not
seized Napoleon. He knew that none of the words now uttered by Napoleon

“You always manage to do things at the wrong time,” continued Véra.

simply to get somewhere. “We shall get somewhere or other!” And they did
good part.

the tone in which he addressed her.
great sacrifices of us... I am ready to submit myself in all things to


“Thanks, thanks, old fellow.... But the bits left over?” said the
detested, rode up while Kutúzov was at dinner. Wolzogen had come from
and there locked himself in and wept bitterly. When he came in to tea,
Natásha knew that she ought to go away, but was unable to do so:




He went up the stairs, puffing and muttering something. His coachman did
that lofty, infinite canopy of heaven that had once towered above him
the standard.
distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest array
General Campan will move through the wood to seize the first
shame on his breast.
significantly.

Again he looked to the right and saw something running toward him across
Deity.
She seemed to promise to explain that necessity to him when he came on
ill-humor. But today she quite forgot that and was hurt that he should
rumored, the allowance of forage money to captains of companies would be
speaking of a collection of snuffboxes that had belonged to Pierre’s
   What magic power is this recalls me still?
him attended to him, unbuttoned his coat, seated him on the raised

expression in his treatment of his daughter. To his former pretexts
“For the dissemination of pure truth and to secure the triumph of
almost frightened, eyes as she passed him.
out of hearing. Another musket missed fire but flashed in the pan.
all of them stared with naïve, childlike curiosity at Pierre’s white hat
attack that nothing on my part has provoked. It still depends on Your
“No, it was not only that gay, kind, and frank look, not only that
“Well, won’t you go on? I had a splendid card all ready,” as if it
distance, while his eyes saw nothing but the astonished, frightened,
the commander in chief’s soul as in that of every Russian.
crumpling her program. “Look, there’s Alénina,” said Sónya,
sitting down, began at once, irritably (as if Borís were to blame in
The wattle wall the men had brought was set up in a semicircle by the

again completely borne away into this strange senseless world—so
thank you! You must have a rest. Be at the levee tomorrow after the
second army—tried to postpone joining up and coming under Barclay’s
the liveliness of a fourteen-year-old boy, and yet it was the face
from the hill. There was no one now between the squadron and the enemy
pseudo-orders during the battle were also no worse than formerly, but
anyone who entered the room. She was evidently expecting news of him and
the cause of her sadness, and because she was feeling well. She was also

Vílna, presented an example exceptional in history of self-sacrifice
received was shown him. A strange lady, the one who had been talking to
Consciousness says: (1) I alone am, and all that exists is but me,

seemed to him. But even then, at moments of weakness as he had accounted
resembled his father’s, affected Pierre so much that when he had kissed
against the palings with its face smeared with soot.
He closed his eyes, and, from all sides as if from a distance, sounds
diplomats, evidently had its own interests which had nothing to do with
“After all, can’t let our men starve.”
a battle not gained by the attacking side in eight hours, after all
stranger, ran back laughing without looking at him.
tired of being run after by women, his vanity was flattered by the
relation to Rostóv. His cold, polite manner did not express his feeling
The conversation turned on the contemporary gossip about those in power,
of singers stood outside the windows. The officer was admitted and

French Emperor’s love and habit of war coinciding with his people’s

were bringing in silver and china, moving tables, and unfolding damask
“No, it’s not that, but worse. You will see. O, Mary, he is too good, he
is alive.

On reaching home Prince Andrew decided to go to Petersburg that autumn
party, interrupting each other in their efforts to entertain their
“Had I seen her before as she is now,” thought Nicholas, “I should
One need only admit that public tranquillity is in danger and any action

at all!”
band, came up and in angry tones asked the artillerymen for water.
that...”
An attendant deferentially and quickly slipped before the ladies and
prince’s orders.
induced her to speak quite frankly. She told him that her only hope
hussar revels and life in the fighting line, the other of the pleasures
“We are all very thankful for your bounty, but it won’t do for us to
“Adieu, Mary,” said he gently to his sister, taking her by the hand
at blindman’s buff with the pursuing army. At the Berëzina they again
mustache and winked so joyfully, when warm steady rain began to fall
“Then why was it forbidden?”


same.
As always happens when traveling, Princess Mary thought only of the
without looking at Prince Andrew—relapsing gradually into a tone of
Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbé as tutor,
notabilities. At Erfurt her success had been brilliant. Napoleon himself
is the problem of history.

strength in life such as he had never before known. And this not only
voice suddenly shrieked: “but if I hear that you have not behaved like


too, seemed unnatural to Prince Andrew.

in the shops and houses—but there was no army.
power to select the most foolish and ruinous of all the courses open
But Sónya, who had gone to look for the papers in the anteroom, had

scoundrel is again at our heels!”
him.
“But she’s stupid. I have myself said she is stupid,” he thought.
in Count Arakchéev’s waiting room.
Next morning, after the fatigues of their journey, the travelers slept
about the corners of his mouth read to the Austrian general the
the old prince, Mademoiselle Bourienne, and the architect; to the other
in front of them, and that the columns moving near Pratzen constituted

favor, and directly they noticed it turning in any direction, this whole
“We won’t speak of it any more, my dear,” said Pierre, and his gentle,

drank a great deal. He was only quite at ease when having poured several
unaccustomed brightness, but he was looking not at his sister but over
regeneration, and return to life.


“You see, brothers...” said he when the shouts had ceased... and all at

lifting his head and proudly thrusting his hand into the bosom of his
There is only Mademoiselle Bourienne....”
lower one, and something like two distinct smiles played continually



see you,” he added, bowing his head.
man could embrace, and evidently long ago some of its branches had been
collar which he had arranged so well at home to seem like a man’s.
safe return with evident joy. On one of his foraging expeditions, in
established by his order.
before his eyes and he lost consciousness. When he came to himself, a
a good match, had drawn his particular attention to her. When he met her
to stop. The lunatic’s solemn, gloomy face was thin and yellow, with
longer he stayed now the more embittered their differences would become.
looking pretty and conscious of it, were standing by the clavichord,
threes and fours, and then Cossacks: some in felt cloaks, some in French
have separated into detachments to defend themselves—congregated into


purpose, for his stomach will not digest the two dinners.

and brought to have his boots mended with, went up to the sick man and
head and began to speak rapidly.
us but within....”
prince, one window frame was removed in each room as soon as the larks

Dólokhov hurriedly interrupted.
another was not decided by Napoleon’s will but occurred independently of
all I have to tell you. Happy he who has ears to hear. Good-by, my dear
he went on, swaying his head. “Because you are sorry for him! Don’t we
“Well, my boy, you’ll get along wherever you go—foot or

pretending to sleep, the sounds his nose emitted during the reading that
Borís had overheard it.

laughed at every word he said or that she said herself, not because what
old fool,” he thought. “That Princess Hélène will be beautiful

“Ha-ha-ha!” laughed Pierre. And he said aloud to himself: “The soldier

of the old prince had not disturbed the order of things in the house,
to change his former way of life, but his strength failed him. He walked

Nicholas the flattering things Princess Mary said of him and vice
frightened the beast, and it rushed forward onto the hunter’s gun,

him now. That search for the aim of life had not merely disappeared

Dólokhov with his feet turned under him. “It’s the very devil!


right. An aide-de-camp approached with gliding steps and offered him a
“If you are refusing for my sake, I am afraid that I...”
to do. I went to my room and reread Joseph Alexéevich’s letters and
and he again began speaking about indifferent matters, about Sergéy
“We’ve got to it at last—why did you not tell me about it

wait only two hours, when, come what might, he would let his excellency
Why and how were the battles of Shevárdino and Borodinó given and
were evidently flurried and intimidated by the directions and shouts of
“I often think,” she continued after a short pause, drawing nearer
front.

him full directions which he had written down for his own guidance as to

our Order can bestow it will render you, my dear sir. You are going to

get married. What about you? That’s what I want to know.”
harder than before. The saturated road no longer absorbed the water,
not answer. The hussar at that moment noticed the face of the red-nosed



her betrothed, found the same comfort in that love, and was still as
Having been taken prisoner and allowed his beard to grow, he seemed to
who wished to distinguish themselves, to astonish somebody, and for some
lovingly suffered for mankind though He Himself was God. What had she to
another time Denísov would not have left the regiment for so slight a


found him, but Marshal Davout was one of those men who purposely put
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

example of Krásnoe and of the Berëzina. It is only possible to capture
commander in chief.
That flank march might not only have failed to give any advantage to
lit, struck Toll by its cold severity.
like the sound of boiling water, but diverse discordant sounds of
reasoning contained in the Mason’s words, or believed as a child

of October: kitchens and sheds were dismantled, carts loaded, and troops
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES
It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the well-known Anna Pávlovna
Much that they remembered had slipped from her mind, and what she

he had left. All the others let him go, and he ran to her. When they
turn the broken ring on his finger and would drop his eyes before the
in solitude on his island, justifying his actions by intrigues and lies
birch forest growing on both sides of the road. In the forest it was
and prepare for Holy Communion, and Natásha gladly welcomed the idea.
Zhilínski evidently did not receive this new Russian person very
Rostóv and Denísov drove away with the wounded Dólokhov.

turned their horses away. The accountant stopped, facing the Cossack,


CHAPTER IX

thought of it made him turn pale and cold.
he noticed everything...”

“Gentlemen, I thank you all; all arms have behaved heroically:
dreadfully afraid for him. It would be good for him to have companions.”

The pilgrim woman was appeased and, being encouraged to talk, gave a
necessary to set aside his final goal and to say to himself: “Today I
there—whether Arakchéev is bad, and all that? What business was it of
with all her heart and all her might. For a while she had stood beside
remained three weeks at Peterhof, receiving Speránski every day and no
“Hardly,” said Bagratión. “I saw them this evening on that
He sometimes noticed with dissatisfaction that he repeated the same
badly of anyone: I love and pity everybody. But what am I to do?”

Rostóv, still looking round toward the fires and the shouts, rode with
hid her face still deeper in the bed. Natásha wept, sitting on the
them strangely of the little princess. But what was still stranger,

owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as

“Because I have noticed that when a young man comes on leave from
She could not pray, could not weep, and worldly cares took possession of
When he reached Kiev he sent for all his stewards to the head office
discipline. Ostermann’s flattering words and promise of a reward should
smartly dressed cavalrymen on good horses, passing the prisoners at a
ready to embrace the countess at the appropriate moment.
and dissipated life, because besides the hours he spent at the Rostóvs’
he knew that the beast was wounded, and wounded as only the whole

and with baritone notes in his voice, new to Borís, pointing to his own
Some said there had been another battle after Borodinó at which the
disclosing a gap where he had lost a tooth (that was why he was called
fire, fanned by the breeze, was rapidly spreading. The French columns
had taken possession of their souls at the consciousness of the
well, never mind, here you are.”

Russians by night by making semicircles to the right.
The doctor who came to see her that day ordered her to continue the
But Anna Mikháylovna went forward a step or two to keep her hold on the
came to him and, after talking a great deal about his exploits,



all done casually in a moment of anger, of illness, and was afterwards

events, and bowed his old head in a spiritual sense as if expecting and

to the church of St. Nicholas on the Arbát, where he had long before

carriage window and looked back and then forward at the long train of
others were recognized. The further the campaign progressed the more
“On the contrary, your Highness, in indecisive actions it is always

“She does, I know,” Pierre cried fiercely.
enormous whole.
curiosity.
height on which the Kiev regiment was stationed, in the hollow where the
but his silence irritated her.
him. He dined with me on Wednesday. As for them”—and she pointed to

either,” he thought. “Yes, I did not know anything, anything at all
night, often lingered with his master’s boots in his hands and clothes
“My dearest darling... Mummy, my precious!...” she whispered
“He has been very unwell since the evening and this is the third night
angrily avoiding Pierre with his eyes and speaking to his men.


And in fact two more peasants began binding Dron, who took off his own
bare-legged Duport, in a tinsel-decorated jacket, jumped about to the
“She is well, but sad. But do you know who rescued her? It is quite a
bold forehead that bent over her hand and answered his question by
not captured.” Again he pondered. “I am very glad you have brought
allusion to the name of the sovereign. Three hundred persons took their
the battlefield, believed that the French had been defeated and were
frowning, looked at him from under his brows.
brought his snuffbox to rest and, without looking at Weyrother or at
room by which Dolgorúkov had entered—a short man in civilian clothes
“Don’t be unkind,” cried Anna Pávlovna from her end of the table
door. While he was getting down from the carriage steps two men, who

very well...”
“Then I’m not mistaken,” thought Countess Mary. “Why is he cross with
and then in light blue, now wore only a smock, and stood beside the
wrapped in a rag.
their way to negotiate with Prince Auersperg. He lets them enter the
is the difficulty? Nonsense, childishness!”
“You know, Count, such knights as you are only found in Madame de
Duchénois, Potier, the Sorbonne, the boulevards,” and noticing that
was repeatedly summoned to see him. At headquarters and among the troops
brought in by the Dorogomílov gate and taken to various parts of Moscow,
Pierre was struck by the modesty of the small though clean house after
for him but grieve him, and to know that you cannot alter this. Then
who maintain that Napoleon was drawn to Moscow by the skill of the
Bagratión rode round the ranks that had marched past him and
Rostopchín’s actions appear irreproachable. “Why were the holy relics,
understood him. The old man got up and gave the letter to his son.
satellites—the senior clerk, a countinghouse clerk, a scullery maid,
Rostóv.
and the whole household went on tiptoe when he was occupied—that is, was
and virtue, and thereby try with all our might to combat the evil which
by the ammunition wagon.
“Because not everything happens as one expects or with the smoothness
“Well, they’ve sent you a tidy sum,” said Berg, eying the heavy

work, just as children are ready to play directly they awake. He could
is it moves me so?”
Emperor was pale, his cheeks sunken and his eyes hollow, but the charm,
us talk business. Have you been to the Horse Guards?”
nonintervention. And...” he paused. “Finally one cannot impute the
reform of the army rules and regulations.
coach house and stable doors, lighting fires in kitchens and kneading
A few minutes later the Governor received Alpátych and hurriedly said to
    CHAPTER IV

sides, crushing human bodies, and that terrible work which was not done
“You live in the country and don’t think the life terrible,” he
“Oh, tell that blockhead,” he said in reply to the question from the
and taking his papers from under his pillow he went to the window, where
this so strongly that the outward and terrible side of death did not
a battalion of the French Guards to the Preobrazhénsk battalion. The
Andrew out to him, and he told them to carry him into the tent.

and the same look. In the middle of a dull and halting conversation,
Pávlovna had had a cough for some days. She was, as she said, suffering
“How lovely!” said everyone who saw her; and the vicomte lifted his
expression only in her more and more beaming face and quivering nose.
chair, and began deliberately with a smile:
philanthropy is all very well of course. The aim is excellent but in the
was found under the old merchant’s pillow. He was tried, knouted, and
peasants and guerrilla troops over the French, the envy aroused by this;
going straight on through the conservatory, neither seeing nor hearing
and comprehensible path, but hoped to do so.


“Hark at them roaring there in the Fifth Company!” said one of the
    CHAPTER XXX
CHAPTER V
that they had money in hand—he would turn up of a morning quite sober

and destroy one another never is expressed in the account of the
wife’s affairs and must rebuild in Moscow. Why this was necessary he
Barclay donned his sash and came out to meet and report to his senior
the question arose whether the troops were to be in marching order or

Prince Vasíli stared at her and at Borís questioningly and perplexed.

nine.”
“Oh, those servants!” said the count, swaying his head.
to remain so for a hundred years; but the moment comes when the lever
“And I am still arguing with your husband. I can’t understand why he

destroy their army—it is quite clear that the battle of Tarútino, just
promised? Nothing! And what little they have promised they will not
important matter. Pierre saw that there was a conspiracy against him and
glass. Letting her arms fall helplessly, she sat with downcast eyes and
For this purpose a capable officer, Bolkhovítinov, was chosen, who
which seemed to him dazzlingly red, and at the feeble, round-shouldered
knew what those society women are, and women in general! My father is
suddenly seemed to him dull and tiresome, and he experienced an
to him an obvious truth. “What theory and science is possible about a
“and if this aim coincides with yours, you may enter our Brotherhood


which lie the ashes of your ancestors! I shall follow the army. I have
of itself, and that apart from the words there is no tune, which exists
he had never seen before, filled Napoleon with the rather envious and


On the second of October a Cossack, Shapoválov, who was out scouting,
of her saint’s-day fete, turned away at once and addressed herself to
flank. If you have seen amiss, sir, do not allow yourself to say what
You can’t wait a moment! Don’t you see the general wants to pass?”
“The devil only knows! They say so.”
and respected by his comrades, subordinates, and superiors, and was well
positions, moving his dirty thick big toes. Every time he looked at his
posterity who view the thing that happened in all its magnitude and
The driver’s eyes sparkled at the sight of the wine. After refusing
The Emperor went into the study. He was followed by Prince Peter
“And who are you?”
to Princess Mary came to a halt by the doorpost.
Frenchman, holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent
above all he remembered his incapacity to think and feel all that time.
contempt. Pierre, however, he adored. He did not want to be an hussar or

On re-entering the shed Prince Andrew lay down on a rug, but he could
his eyes he heard in front of him, where the enemy was, the long-drawn
“Mummy!... darling!... I am here, my dearest Mummy,” she kept on
thousand-ruble horses, only eighteen were left after the charge.
service, and the appointment he seeks in Turkey comes to nothing. During

“Who’s that?” asked the old prince, noticing Pierre as he got out
understand her but simply loved her.
had, or had not, a hundred and thirty inferior fire engines. Deserted
have killed so many that there’d have been a heap of them.”
they would all have to go begging. The count was so weak, and trusted
started,” thought Prince Andrew, watching his old acquaintance with
force had already descended into the valley toward the ponds and lakes
countryside—“See, our infantrymen have already got there. Look there
was keeping the bank. Rostóv had not seen him since his proposal and
her path.
told you it would not be enough. How much?”
“Not seen Duport—the famous dancer? Well then, you won’t
arms on the table and began to read. After reading a few lines, he
weary faces, were sitting at the table eating and drinking.
climb out of the window.
well and in that case badly. He behaved admirably at the beginning of
neither. With wide-open eyes she gazed at the moonlight and the shadows,
The countess lowered her eyes, sighing deeply.

Circassian cap to his master and looked at him scornfully. This scorn
should be if I could now say: ‘Lord, have mercy on me!’... But to
more and more frequently.


missed him. His one desire was to know what was happening and at any
he began to pace the room.
“Highly satisfied, your excellency!”
my business. I owe you my life. That is enough for me. I am quite at

figure of Túshin who was sitting cross-legged like a Turk beside him.

“Mr. Aide-de-camp! Help me!... What does it all mean?” screamed the
not suit in the least. Not in the least! Please change it.”
beauty, of which he had heard much.
soldier at the front, gave the command “Attention!” and rode up
was in the way and was the only one who did not notice the fact. Most of
They’re coming!” Alarmed voices were heard, and a stir of final
happiness. The old princess sighed sadly as she offered some wine to the
the movement of history, we see that every year and with each new
Boulogne expedition.
to help with the harvest or to dig ponds, and ditches, but he disliked

Satisfied on these great points and with tranquility everywhere, I
“No, and if I had I shouldn’t have recognized her.”
were the center of groups which even strangers approached respectfully
flung out violently.
footpace. Pétya rode beside him, longing to look round to see whether or

“Borís,” she said to her son with a smile, “I shall go in to see
called him a great man,” remarked the vicomte.
in the passage and porch. The tall lad waved his arm.
He said this because on his journey from Petersburg he had had the honor
Besides this, the whole staff of the Russian army was now reorganized.
enemy three times as strong, who would hem him in from two sides.
stretching himself he rose from the table. “One does get tired sitting

was mortified to feel that his mental capacity was inadequate for the
of the general sorrow.
cross to the Kalúga road, but just then an adjutant gallops up from
One army fled and the other pursued. Beyond Smolénsk there were several

but only a sort of puppet show at which the men of the day were playing,
somewhere about something and apparently finding pleasure in it—then
First the man in the tight trousers sang alone, then she sang, then they
down and up, rose higher and higher to the village of Valúevo visible


did not, for instance, say to himself: “This man now has influence, I


Napoleon’s words. “‘I opened my antechambers and they crowded
“Why’s that fellow in front of the line?” shouted somebody at him again.

He went to his bed, drew a purse from under the clean pillow, and sent
mowers, then he counted his steps, calculating how often he must walk
reading...” He showed her the broadsheet. “Count Rostopchín writes that

of occupation, that is, of his way of life—now that that was so
looking into her eyes. “Your offer...” (she grew confused) “is
officer still less often acts directly himself, but commands still more
Sónya felt that this was true: that the only possibility of retrieving

her cheeks.
he wished to say, “Mon très honorable préopinant”—“My very honorable
incessantly with other people and suddenly remembered that this could
***** This file should be named 2600-0.txt or 2600-0.zip ***** This and
going in to supper I looked and he had broken everything on my table to
“Good morning, good morning! But don’t go overriding the hounds,”

order to destroy the French army, which without external interference

the same instant of time, or of an effect without a cause, that only
devoid of any foundation. Prince Bagratión turned to the old colonel:
Moscow I will accept terms of peace worthy of myself and of my people.
into society and dancing the mazurka with her as his old father had
part—transfer the will of the people to a new ruler? In international

cannot say why this occurs, and we say that it is so because it is

when Denísov explained that his purpose was to kill the French, and
The countess’ eyes filled with tears and she pondered in silence.
“Oh, my enchantress!” she cried to the blushing Natásha.
after dinner Pierre left Moscow. When changing horses that night
that while Napoleon’s proclamation was being read to the troops the
with him for an attack on the transport.
the letter to the Emperor myself so much the worse for Drubetskóy who

after rain, and the air was unusually pure. The smoke did not hang low

risen and was going toward his room.
of the wood ran out of it, the different companies getting mixed, and
“That passion which more than all others caused you to waver on the
“Yes: ideas of robbery, murder, and regicide,” again interjected an
doctor brought one of them, a young Italian, to see Pierre.
are, Monsieur Pierre!”
“On the contrary,” replied the prince, who had plainly become
him.
that was good.
his brisk little horse.
the notion that Buonaparte is negotiating on equal terms with all the
covered by smoke clouds from the guns, and the slanting rays of the
Túshin, don’t you remember, who gave you a lift at Schön Grabern?
taken from the prisoner.
taking her eyes off the stage. And feeling the bright light that flooded

and come into line with the rest of the forces.
intended to visit all his estates and see for himself how far his orders
he had said absent-mindedly: “Yes, she’s good looking,” he had
presenting his fat shoulders.
Yesterday I learned that, despite the loyalty with which I have kept
She spoke rapidly and did not notice how Pierre flushed at her words. “I
be simply: Maison de ma Mère, *(2) he concluded. “But am I really in

“I must ask someone who knows,” he thought, and addressed an officer who
adjutant told them that the affair was likely to take a very bad
arrived from abroad, had he been told that there was no need for him
“Ah, how afraid I am for her, how afraid I am!” said the countess,
theory. If the conditions under which power is entrusted consist in the
his door, which creaked slightly when opened.
“Ah, you’ve come here too, young man!” he said, smiling and
“Well, aren’t you ashamed of yourself, Captain Túshin?” he
was not behaving very well in this matter. “Youth, frivolity... well,
“In an hour’s time, I should say.”
One day she went quickly upstairs and found herself out of breath.
cattle keeps well together when crossing a barren field, but gets out
question is again a twofold one: firstly...”
     * The Illuminati sought to substitute republican for
both....” He lifted his head and again the thick vein in his thin neck
“Yes, I do believe in God,” he repeated.
“Probably,” said Prince Andrew moving toward the outer door.
“Now I see it all! I know who has been intriguing—I know!” cried


alone knew what their life meant to them, and so they neither understood

Nothing in life seemed to him of much importance, and under the
go. I knew you’d let them come!” she said quickly all in one breath.
won’t be in action,” he added as if in apology.




colonel’s athletic back, his nape covered with light hair, and his red
Natásha smiled bashfully.
good luck.”
at Drissa, according to Pfuel’s plan, but on changing the movements of

“Really, truly!” answered Natásha, pushing in a crisp lock that had
“But why talk of me?... Talk to me, yes, tell me about your travels

of the Thabor Bridge is delightful! It is not exactly stupidity, nor

him:
“Oh!” said Pierre, looking over his spectacles in perplexity at Prince

if we only dreamed it or were told about him.”
suddenly heavy slanting rain came down.
Weyrother, hurriedly rising from his seat and going up to the table on
bring himself to part from his daughter and give her to a husband. The

Vyazmítinov, the new military governor general of Petersburg, had
But the most amazing example of the ineffectiveness of the orders given
experienced before. All that was distressing, and especially all that
same inquisitive, challenging, and rather mocking eyes still looked


share defeat and disgrace with Kutúzov’s whole army.”
“Very good!” said Bagratión.
The son, lowering his eyes, followed her quietly.
No. 17 of the captured Russians, arrested and detained for some reason
lad hung his head gloomily. It was evident that no one had understood
morning. Among other things he spoke of the Boguchárovo elder. Countess
but not concealing the fact that she would not be distressed if they
naval uniform, with a dirk, and holding his cap under his arm, he handed
They unloaded the wardrobe cart and sent it to take wounded men from a

cakes; only one thing was lacking that he had always seen at the evening
the snow, greedily bit at it, again raised his head, adjusted himself,
It was pleasant and touching to see these little girls in love; but
grimace. “I have long wanted to ask you, Andrew, why you have changed
become calmer since I began to live only for myself.”
his intention. He went to Tver to see Joseph Alexéevich’s widow, who
armies had its own commander in chief, but there was no supreme
“It’s getting light, it’s really getting light!” he exclaimed.
seven virtues, corresponding to the seven steps of Solomon’s temple,
happiness and that this happiness had something to do with the Gospels.
he clutched at his head. “Who is going to get me the flowers? Dmítri!
not worse than this one.”
all that goes on in the world and especially about the honors conferred
unfamiliar Polish accent and not realizing that the interpreter was

Pétya, pacing the room with large, resolute strides. “Now I’m very
some indefinite order.
more and I should have understood it all! But what am I to do? Harness,
failed. Borís on the contrary at once found his footing, and related
an inconvenience resulting from marrying two husbands at the same time,
whole universe. Don’t I feel in my soul that I am part of this vast

   A Rhipheus at home, a Caesar in the field!
imprudent to “overresist” them without an armed force, and would it not
Pierre.

Prince Vasíli arrived that evening. He was met in the avenue by
lesson, was about to leave: “Mathematics are most important, madam!
cousinage est un dangereux voisinage. * Don’t you think so?”
and geology, which directly contradict its assumptions.
apologize.”
So he lay now on his bed, supporting his large, heavy, scarred head on
day spent in inaction and solitude (he tried several times to fix his
he need only have bent his head a little to have touched them. He was


surrendered but had beaten the French.
each step from the heel to the toe (she had on a new and favorite pair
Empire; my dictatorship would have been finished, and his constitutional

times before: how the late princess had given birth to Princess Mary
“My dear, really... it’s better not to wake him... he’s asleep,”

“The French have abandoned the left bank?”


woman who could not understand all that constitutes a man’s dignity,
Rostóv did not think what this call for stretchers meant; he ran on,
the so-called King of Rome spiking the earth with a stick, the allegory
kiss them, but clung to that which reminded her most nearly of him—his
under his leadership will be directed against the redoubt and come into
Higher up the hill, on the very horizon, our guns were visible through
Stop, stop!” she cried to the coachman.

dictated the dispositions in German, and now, much exhausted, he arrived

Empress’ Field, not understanding the significance of the firing, nor
Anatole. “Well, comrades and friends...” he considered for a moment “...
on the arbitrary assumption that the collective will of the people is
“Kiss me here,” and he touched his cheek: “Thanks, thanks!”
pleasant and flattering to him.
they both felt happy). “We had our hands full last night. However, I
it before?”

exhausted and hungry, went forward led by their officers. Others held
If I examine an act I performed a moment ago in approximately the same
in which the more this person expresses opinions, predictions, and
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
infantry and cavalry and took up its appointed position. Not only the

a hero of some sort, and reproached one another and especially Kutúzov


“If I were a woman I would do so, Mary. That is a woman’s virtue. But
Having received all his orders Alpátych, wearing a white beaver hat—a

confirmed Natásha’s assurances that nothing had happened. From
Most of the guests, uncertain how to regard this sally, looked at the

while Sónya was not,” continued Natásha. “Now I am so glad! Well,
it. Loud, coarse laughter and joyous shouts ensued.
to tell of my experiences. In general I have noticed that it is very
countess, turning to little Nicholas who was coming in with Dessalles.
of Kiev ware. “These—yes, these must go among the carpets,” she said,
latest cut, such as no one else yet had in Moscow, and boots of the
dish for her. “Well, my dear, and how are we getting on?” he asked,
“This,” answered Nicholas. “You say it rests with me. Well, I
easy to have a good style,” returned Count Rostopchín.
which I shall lead the army.”


two.
against which they had hurt themselves. Ney, who had had a corps of ten
her inflamed and perspiring cheeks, her charming rosy mouth with its
under his black mustache. “I’d have killed him if they hadn’t



to go by the back stairs, yet judging by Anna Mikháylovna’s air
seven gifts of the Holy Spirit. Brother O. was very eloquent. In the
Moscow?” he asked.



In Petersburg at that time a complicated struggle was being carried on
surrender!” He hurriedly but vainly tried to get his foot out of the
several overturned carts, and frightened and laughing faces among the
were quarrels, his kindly smile and well-timed jests reconciled the
Someone? There is the future life. The Someone is—God.”

“No, it’s only the unexpectedness of it,” thought Pierre. But as soon as
If the doctors did not keep me here at the spas I should be back in
despair, grief, and the heroism of the Russians. But it was not really
position. Smiling unnaturally and muttering to himself, he first sat
mantle, and stretched his long legs forward in French fashion. This man
therefore have struck him all the more pleasantly, but he still felt
goal—their native land—was too remote, and their immediate goal

polemic with M. Fain to prove that this work of genius must be referred
But though toward the end of the battle the men felt all the horror of
father there would be nothing I could reproach you with,” said Anna
“Natásha?” she murmured.
Countess Bezúkhova quite deserved her reputation of being a fascinating
To find component forces equal to the composite or resultant force, the

were bringing in jugs and basins, hot water for shaving, and their

him to despatch part of the army abroad and to create a new condition
He was not a gambler, at any rate he did not care about winning. He was
On everything—far and near—lay the magic crystal glitter seen only at
officers and men of the Old Guard who had run up to see the portrait.
but when she understood its meaning it grieved her. “Can she have loved
repeating the terms of the wager to him in English.
Pétya.
“O God, if he were here now I would not behave as I did then, but

me—yet dreadful and unnatural as it seems, I would give them all at
understanding half of it, read only to forget, if but for a moment, what

“It was your son’s turn to be conscripted, but no fear! You begrudged

unconsciously and quite forgetting her condition, prepared for the
more playing with life, that now I am grown up, that on me now lies
foreseen—are met, and on how and by whom the whole matter is handled.
and all his comrades of the Guards by his appearance—that of a

speaking very gently.

doing with it.

a well-to-do homestead, plenty of land, we peasants lived well and our

they would have remained there for a long time testing each other’s
saying something witty and stinging.
whether what he said was very witty or very stupid. He was dressed in
eye at the sun, which showed like a huge crimson ball in the unclouded
stranger, looking deeper and deeper into Pierre’s eyes. “And in
tiresome,” said Natásha in a mortified voice that trembled slightly.
a moment. The sick man was given something to drink, there was a
“You see, Aunt, Mamma has long wanted me to marry an heiress, but the
“Where the devil have the leg bands been shoved to?” said an


seventeen of the forty men of the guns’ crews had been disabled, but


innate love of death or of rebirth to a new life.” These words are all
at any rate his light-blue eyes gazed for about two seconds into

feel that in that place and on that day, it was improper to speak so of
phenomena. In astronomy it was the immovability of the earth, in history
After the loss of the Shevárdino Redoubt, we found ourselves on the
nobody and had no name. The French called it Azor; the soldier who
her something, and the fact that her presence always increased his
general. To the Polish general he replied to the same effect, informing
bridge, and they laughed at and slandered him, flinging themselves on,


They seized him by his arms; but he was so strong that everyone who
“When am I to wear it?” and Natásha stuck it in her coil of hair. “When
As soon as he learned that the Russian army was in such a hopeless

Pierre.
in his customary bass.
Dólokhov, who had reappeared that year in Moscow after his exile and
had been recovered and would be restored to him.
Half an hour later, the Rhetor returned to inform the seeker of the
character like us women who, when we suffer, can weep away our sorrows.
visitor alluded to, though she had already heard about the cause of

which she had heard before.
thought and heard of her might be false. And he again saw her not as the
before, when I had a nap and told Bennigsen to issue orders? Or was it
“And so you had to go through that too!”
did till they all stopped and he stopped too. The only thought in his
to write to. In Moscow Princess Mary had no one to talk to, no one to

headquarters. But on the afternoon of that day, this activity reached
conditions, now had as it were an additional setting of external



and returned a glove Pierre had dropped; the doctors became respectfully
loved face, a new life force took possession of her and compelled her to
proceeding from the house.

    CHAPTER VII
(The captain of whom the corporal spoke often had long chats with Pierre

promptings of the throng.
no one will ever know it.” And his soul felt calm and peaceful.
a good thing for proprietors who perish morally, bring remorse upon
and she’s even in my way. You know I always was a savage, and now am
If the commanders had been guided by reason, it would seem that it must
Sónya was sitting at the clavichord, playing the prelude to
for the sovereigns.
said her mother, thoughtfully, referring to some verses Prince Andrew
“I intended to re-form them beyond the village, your excellency,”
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
that passionate animal feeling which was apt to master him with great

“I am not petitioning, your excellency,” returned Prince Andrew
imagination been playing the role of director of the popular feeling
count’s services, his request would be granted?...”

The steward did not say it was quite impossible, but suggested selling
Napoleon raised his voice.
property had been left, brought there from other houses, complained of

and whether anything had happened to her betrothed, she assured him
Sónya smiled.
a German tutor for Prince Nicholas. Then if your love or passion or

“Ah!” said Anatole. “Well, sit down.”
In both cases his personal activity, having no more force than the
propose is the only thing possible.”


meeting was a full one. After the usual ceremonies Pierre rose and began
only telling you what it is. Napoleon has also formed his plan by now,


Chance contrives that though he directs all his efforts to prepare an
to the house, questioning him as to the state of affairs. It appeared
action.

ought not to refuse a supplicant, and ought to reach a helping hand to
the darkness.
limp like a rag, and the horror of unavoidable destruction seizes him in
Mary’s room.
battle, while Napoleon, who was said to be a commander of genius,
so widely from a private.
coming up.
melancholy, and with these she had prolonged conversations in private

matter might be he did not care, but it gave him great pleasure to
wrists visible from under the shirt cuffs, laid down the pack and took
rapid, self-confident, familiar tone. “Here is my second son; please
could her father, whom she knew loved her in spite of it all, be unjust?
was glued. They all sang something. When they had finished their song
come to look after him.
by the roadside.
himself began to eat greedily and quickly like a healthy and hungry man,

“I hear that their affairs are in a very bad way,” said Julie. “And he
us soldiers!” he added, smiling, after a momentary pause. “So much
unintentionally, he poured too many drops into the glass. He threw the

cried the old count. “My head’s in a whirl!”

come in and interrupted him. The adjutant, also, had evidently had no
gave a loud exclamation, flushed, and ran out of the room.
occupied one of the highest posts in the Empire. In Vílna she had formed



unexpected and childlike pleasure in this purchase of presents for
desperate and agonized terror...”
lunch as he had promised. He was in very good spirits; the affair with
“Why, this...”
through his black coat. The dust always hung motionless above the buzz
clever with Véra,” said the count. “Well, what of that? She’s
to his inn. The paper handed to him by the Governor said this:
estates in the south and there attending to the welfare of his serfs.
    * Though a foreigner, Russian in heart and soul.
always dragging it in one direction. He tried to get away from them, but
Denísov, Denísov! We’re almost there!”
“She needs rest,” said Prince Andrew with a frown. “Don’t you,


“How often have I asked you not to take my things?” she said. “You
“I say, Balagá,” said Anatole, putting his hands on the man’s
him, peremptorily requested him to remain there, to move on with the
inhabitants of Moscow. It was long since people had been as gay in
Only now, on his visit to Bald Hills, did Pierre fully realize the
her and screamed:
He looked intently and inquiringly into his friend’s eyes, evidently
making the Cossack a present, had him set free like a bird restored to
“Yes, sire.”
afraid she might find some means of consolation, he returned and trying
Natásha glanced at her ironically without knowing why.
humming of tens of thousands of bees with their abdomens threateningly
CHAPTER XVIII

most beautiful of them all, our Márya Antónovna! And how simply she
Andrew. This was Speránski’s cold, mirrorlike look, which did not
Schérer.”
“What! Are you going to remain as you are, dear princess?” she
said, exchanging glances with his young companion. “Anyhow his Serene
battalions and artillery pass by and go forward and then Generals
“Good-by, Andrew! Remember that misfortunes come from God, and men are
“but it must be brought to a head. The day after tomorrow will be
“What’s it all about? Why, the French have crossed the bridge that
“Let God and our gweat monarch judge me afterwards!” said Denísov
someone. (Prince Bagratión did not ask about the guns on the left
Princess Mary, little as he seemed to value her, was unthinkable to

of women chattering as they rinsed their linen or beat it with wooden

shove with his knee. This was followed by a burst of laughter.
Anatole consented and went to Moscow, where he put up at Pierre’s
“What knights? What do you mean?” demanded Pierre, blushing.
go.”
or anybody; but you are free to choose.... Go to your room, think it
“Is the cabman to be discharged, your honor?”
that he should do the same. The rider, whose figure seemed familiar
himself and Natásha could not be binding either on her or on him. He
billet troops in the villages of any district and the number of fires in
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
may perhaps have a stronger effect on the sincere seeker after wisdom

“No, he will make his entry tomorrow,” he replied, and continued his

bad man?”

they want me to learn. And I will learn. But someday I shall have
“Ah, he’s come?” said Pierre. “And Plat—” he began, but did not finish.
the distance, the other pack rushed by the wood past the count, and
It was the voice of the groom, trying to wake him. The sun shone

though only one artilleryman survived out of every three, and though
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
On August 25, the eve of the battle of Borodinó, M. de Beausset, prefect

was rapidly demonstrating that not only all that had happened, but all
were current. But not listening to what Firhoff was saying, he was
everything!” said Nicholas. “And I will prove it to you.”

the Krémlin he even began to avoid being crushed and resolutely stuck

Pierre was in a state bordering on insanity. He was completely obsessed

to Mozháysk on the twenty-fifth and to make his way to the very thick
a tail coat, and put on narrow boots with pointed toes, and drive to

looking round at the sound.
mist, and here and there the roofs of huts in Borodinó as well as dense



instant of delay might cost him his life; but he did not know what

glow! Natásha, do look! You can see it from the window,” she said to her


hands of the French. The Russians retreat and abandon their ancient
are we to find Suvórovs now? Je vous demande un peu,” *(4) said he,
are quartered. “Le patriotisme féroce de Rostopchíne” and the barbarity
received Pierre with a shade of melancholy, evidently relating to the
“Look, it must be in Moscow!”
“Well, what do you think about it?” Pierre asked. “Why are you
anyone—while she felt herself so capable of loving and being loved.
and more diffident than usual. The guests were reluctant to address
“To speak to her now wouldn’t do,” said the princess all the same.
there must be some linen left over.”

On the same day the Chief of Police came to Pierre, inviting him to send


“Mamma! Bolkónski has come!” she said. “Mamma, it is awful, it is
trees grew some kind of lush, wet, bushy vegetation with silver-lit
vicomte who was continuing his story.

actual phrase used by the Vienna cabinet,” said the Danish chargé
we combine in one simultaneous expression a whole series of consecutive
affairs, which called for some decisive action. Their town house and

“Me petition the Empewo’!” exclaimed Denísov, in a voice to which
    CHAPTER XVIII
de châle, but at this last ball only the écossaise, the anglaise, and
talks with experts, tried to form a definite opinion about it. But the
this boy during that conversation, and remembering all he had said he
blow or the death of Napoleon, but with extraordinary vividness and
taken two, a third had set a house on fire, while another had simply
asking three rubles for carting—it isn’t Christian!”
listened to her timid story.
leisure to an account of the great deeds he had done, he wrote:
“Auntie, darling, do tell me what it is!”
Austrian army of Ulm. They are the same battalions you broke at
Pétya’s rapturous account. “But, devil take you, I haven’t slept because
“Sell us that horse!” Denísov called out to the Cossacks.
visiting them for the third time already.
straightforward. Now we see light....”

“I’ll stand guard on it myself!” said Ilyín.
the general, who looked through his field glass.

and stars, they would tell me of their victories over the Russians, and

When Princess Mary returned from her father, the little princess sat
Pierre well knew this large room divided by columns and an arch, its
Reason gives expression to the laws of inevitability. Consciousness

malefactors mitigates his fault in our eyes. The self-sacrifice of a father
to left across the road. One of them fell in the mud under his horse’s
generals he knew personally had been killed or wounded, and the
windows opening into the conservatory, with its large bust and full
“It is, your excellency,” replied the adjutant.

general, in Russian, speaking with the French intonation he affected
powder and paint: he will not be wanted any more.
special character. The faces of the unimportant people awaiting their
Dólokhov climbed carefully and slowly through the window and lowered
different kinds of vodka, pickled mushrooms, rye cakes made with
as he expected he was appointed an adjutant to the governor general of

discussion.
priceless man, but he’s sixty. Is he to go up for examination?”

will come!”
has told me all about it.”

things he did wrong at this period of his reign.
“Hurrah!” were running not forwards but backwards, it seemed to Pierre.
everyone met with the words:

Anna Pávlovna gave him her shriveled hand to kiss and introduced him to
Natásha’s wound healed in that way. She thought her life was ended,

She wished to help him, to bestow on him the superabundance of her own
gallop and as if by agreement all said the same thing. They all asked

count. “She’s as good as many a man!”
A tall, bald-headed old man with a red nose, wearing a dressing gown and
for their pipes, smoked, went to fetch more tea from Sónya—who sat weary
his helplessness.
he unconsciously gave Pierre’s spiritual life its due) he would not have
Dólokhov’s home: on the third day he received a note from him:
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
them; we call those forces gravitation, inertia, electricity, animal




Petersburg earlier or later, or whether he secured accommodation at this
and fussily in the easy chair, “how is it Annette never got married?
“Now, Pierre nurses them splendidly,” said Natásha. “He says his hand is
Uvárov, who had arrived with him, paused at the doorway to allow him,
know myself again.”
“Well, Michael Mítrich, sir?” he said, addressing one of the
father, coldly, maliciously, and unpleasantly.
from her regrets, desires, remorse, hopes, and sins.
leading the Tsar’s beautiful relay horses covered with embroidered
“I understand why he” (Prince Andrew) “liked no one so much as him,”
frowning and addressed the esaul, conveying his own conjectures to him.
could to achieve it, Pierre hastily took the blunt jagged dagger in a
plan, and there was no intention of retiring farther. The Emperor
She started, flushed, and sighed deeply.
“But in what was I to blame?” he asked. “In marrying her without
at science. He received me graciously and made me sit down on the bed
The staff captain’s voice began to tremble. “You have been in the
“Now, quick march, lads!” said Anatole, rising.
assiduity of its commander the regiment, in comparison with others that
wearing a short jacket, bast shoes, and a Kazán hat, was approaching
command as long as he could. Bagratión was slow in effecting the
confronted one another as before.
anything, doesn’t remember anything,” she went on, repeating her usual

whole conversation with Kurágin, and again saw the face, gestures, and


the gentlemen and Mademoiselle Bourienne rose and the little princess,
this loving despot—the more cruel because he loved her and for that
now nursing. She had grown stouter and broader, so that it was difficult
and appeal, which he would obtain from Count Rostopchín.
helplessly spread out, stood with his broad chest directly facing
Tsar’s and of an oath to the Tsar Paul in 1797 (in connection with which

road came priests in their vestments—one little old man in a hood with
shoes he had suffered just as he did now when he walked with bare feet
Catholics and had the Pope’s indulgence for doing woolwork on Sundays.
laughter, and after such a laugh she always felt nearer to him. Natásha
“And they said Kutúzov was blind of one eye?”
The count was the first to rise, and with a loud sigh crossed himself
him in a gay, careless manner, spoke casually of how she had enjoyed
At the battle of Borodinó Napoleon shot at no one and killed no one.
had not yet come home when Rostóv rode back early in the morning from
an alliance with him, it means that that is the right thing to do. If
Are we despicable Germans?”
heavier it grew. And suddenly Brother A. came and, taking my arm, led
village of Pratzen. But neither they nor a single commanding officer
cut deep into his heart and drawn blood. Even now he felt clearly that
“No, I don’t believe we ever were in animals,” said Natásha,
“You wait a bit,” he called after him. “I’m not joking, I’m

warned him that with his corpulence wine was dangerous for him, he
their rushing and galloping at one another did little harm, the harm of

to Moscow the effect Natásha had on him made him hasten to carry out


In the rearguard, Dokhtúrov and others rallying some battalions kept up

around them, they would have captured Murat and everything there.
if anyone came to see him he was glad.
important personages that much that was concealed from others was
experienced a variety of most complex sensations. He felt afraid of what
exalted personages passing in the streets in their elegant carriages
in the service, heard with pleasure of the things done in Petersburg
“Now look out for the ball... we’ll throw it back.”


have the pistol.”

He drew back and a real tear appeared in his eye.
be adjutant general to His Majesty....”
“To Moscow, our ancient Capital!
Though at one time, in Petersburg, she had been annoyed with Natásha
own parish, but at a church where, according to the devout Agraféna
phenomenon comprehended, and therefore man’s every action, must have
“Give me your hand,” said he and, turning it over so as to feel the
out of Rostopchín’s private room.
question to Davout.

her.


which showed that nothing would make him alter his decision.
the air.
this is what I was proud of! I then thought that I did not understand
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
coffin, a pall was spread over it, the floor was strewn with sprays of

“Well, and he?” asked the count.

down the hillsides, and clouds of cannon smoke rolling, spreading,
The position was the more awkward because the Emperor, meditating upon
with us.”
The council of war was just over when Prince Andrew accompanied
with the Emperor that day.
at first irregularly at varying intervals—trata...tat—and then more
expression of the whole historical movement is hard to understand.
With Mademoiselle Bourienne’s help the princess had maintained the
village, outside the drink shop, another meeting was being held, which


and his horse. Two wise old dogs lay down unleashed. Some hundred paces

slackness which had shown itself even in his eyes was now replaced by an
“Uncle” too was in high spirits and far from being offended by the
have written confirmation of the order the field marshal had given.

would happen according to plan, and therefore insisted that it was just
turned up. One’s quite frozen and the other’s an awful swaggerer. He’s
limited for time, and with this difference too, that a knight is always


pale-faced, fair-haired, with narrow light eyes and with calm
Every violent reform deserves censure, for it quite fails to remedy

be ecstatic about it. But he retrieved his mistake at once. “Now, is
Bolkónski noticed the hussar’s state of mind, and it amused him. With
moment consider what she should do), but all this had long been familiar


impossible.
CHAPTER VIII
strange chance no one does so and all rapturously greet the man they
out to them. It’s all a trick,” said Dunyásha, “and when Yákov Alpátych

the chantry long before, but that nine tenths of the peasants in that
reflection of what had to happen.
“How much longer? How much longer? Oh, these insufferable streets,
disinterested of cranks. They called him in to decide family disputes,
night on the twenty-fourth? A Cossack patrol would have sufficed to
concentration of batteries on one point, an attack by reserves to break
Princess Mary roused him from his abstraction by drawing his attention
“Well done!... Fine fellow!... There’s a bet for you!... Devil take
expression. It was the heavy tread of Princess Mary that he heard.
the drawing room and seeing Anatole went up to him.

administered. Come.”
told him that he should try to do nothing to stain the whiteness of that
“But don’t hurt my little horse!” said the Alsatian good-naturedly
reception hall: Michael Ivánovich, Mademoiselle Bourienne, Princess
stood rows of French troops in blue uniforms with red epaulets and high
I shall conclude will be worthy of my people, of you, and of myself.
a present to Belóva, nor toys for his wife’s nephews. In the early days
resounded in their imagination, and hindered their gazing into those
Mademoiselle Bourienne jumped up eagerly.

“And at your age what secrets can there be between Natásha and
time, they will do it all. But the advisers n’entendent pas de cette
the thought of his wife which had been a continual torment to him was no

hindrance on their return journey. (5) Steps will immediately be taken

round more frequently toward her, and broke off in what he was saying.
BOOK EIGHT: 1811 - 12
“They have gone to bed and put out their lights, your excellency.”

and I don’t now.”


Napoleon, Berthier’s eyes turned to look at a general with a suite, who
“Ulyulyulyu!” whispered Rostóv, pouting his lips. The borzois
“You shameless good-for-nothing!” said she. “I won’t hear a word.”
     * A bastard.
“Very sad, sire,” replied Michaud, lowering his eyes with a sigh. “The
at the short-sightedness of men who seek enjoyment and happiness here
embracing Denísov. “Nicholas wrote us... Natásha, Véra, look! Here
its handsome, sensual mouth, and its cold, majestic expression, was
Dnieper at night by stealth at a wooded spot.
Neither in Moscow nor anywhere in Russia did anything resembling an
toward the door.

“so it is useless to ask whether it is good or bad. It is good because
action was that he himself was going to don a uniform and ride at the
telling him.


the son, or Pierre, whom it had been pitiful to see, so stricken was he
and into ladies’ society with an affectation of doing so against his

“So you are still at that silly business!” quickly closed his eye

commanded from attacking and a battle had taken place.
Mary Hendríkhovna assented and began looking for the spoon which someone
mercy on us and save us!” he concluded, then bowed to the ground, got
Frenchman again and smiled. He took out an assignation ruble note and
door? Oh, she is a pearl among women, Princess,” he added, turning to
better to shoot such rabble,” and burst into loud laughter, so strange
pretty young Princesses Gorchakóv met suitors there and were married
“My dear,” Princess Mary entering at such a moment would say,
called her back.
As at Tilsit Rostóv had not allowed himself to doubt that what everybody
knew and who had a strap round the calf of one leg, crossed himself,
houses from his door. It seemed to him the horses were not moving at



had been received in Petersburg, a detailed plan of the whole campaign
uniforms advanced toward the bridge at a run. Smoke appeared again
at it, and stamped his foot twice on the floor as a signal. The door
tomorrow’s action, and new men would come to the front. So Borís was
and looks more than in the substance of the speeches—infected him too.

necessity is increased and diminished depend on three considerations:
   Russians! O’er all barriers on!
heroes and rulers, but as the resultant of a multiplicity of variously

silently led them to the edge of the forest.

so. It appears so to us because we see only the general historic

Austerlitz, Friedland, Vítebsk, and Smolénsk. Let our remotest posterity
to recollect something. Prince Andrew stepped forward from among the

“He is my uncle, your Sewene Highness.”

played the polonaise in vogue at that time on account of the words that
Smolénsk threatening Bald Hills—even then I wouldn’t serve in the

how can I, an insignificant mortal, show His omnipotence, His infinity,
The command of the left flank belonged by seniority to the commander of
his life, on which everything depended and which made everything appear
any result more opportune than the actual outcome of this battle. With
my girls with me. They say Semënova acts marvelously. Count Pierre
who had just thrown out the drawer of a chest, filled with metal
thought... No, nothing else.”
“Take this road, your honor, that way you will be killed at once!” a
the twenty-sixth of August was unimportant.
something on which to vent his rage.
cost money! How can you chuck it in like that or shove it under the cord

not fit in under any rule and is directly opposed to a well-known rule
the general knew. Having heard Rostóv to the end, the general shook his

thought. Having wept, talked, and wiped away their tears, the two
impossibility, as in fact thought Kutúzov, who when he received the plan
Though people were afraid of Márya Dmítrievna she was regarded in
their things snatched off and their earrings torn out...” he flushed and
Natásha awoke and saw Sónya.
threw his stick at Philip, and instantly gave instructions to have him
“It von’t go begging,” replied the German with a smile.
take a seat beside her.

battalion commanders who smilingly pressed forward (it was plain that
heard.”
staff were not far off, in the village the vehicles were going to.

different kinds, all of which are incommensurate with the movement
old émigré who declined to marry the lady with whom he had spent his
officers, generals, and adjutants, as they passed Rostóv going or
want anything!” he shouted.
as a force that itself produces events. Yet in most cases universal
played “Uncle” once more, running his fingers skillfully over the
hostess’ hand and taking a seat beside her. “I am so sick of it.”





which hides its head in a bush in order not to be seen: he hung his head
gazing at him through tears that filled his swollen eyes. He remembered
Balashëv bowed his head with an air indicating that he would like to
not as they generally prepared for it in the Rostóv family by attending
strength to the utmost and could not have done more without destroying
    CHAPTER XX
usually known to him, and by this means he rose higher in their
their knotted purple veins were lying on the quilt; his left eye gazed
now been admitted to the true Catholic Church and that in a few days the
a peculiar significance to the spectacle, as music does to tableaux
On the day the count left, Sónya and Natásha were invited to a big
should already have suggested to your heart, if it is sincere, more than
away from him. The alliance with Prussia, Austria’s treachery,

you believe it, he jabbered something in their lingo.”
Borís paused in the middle of the room, looked round, brushed a little

All day she had lived only in hope of seeing him that night. But now
lieutenant, who captain, who was a good fellow, who a bad one, and most
Those dreadful moments he had lived through at the executions had as it
had fallen the previous day—the day of the battle. Reviewing his
linen shirt unfastened in front. “Wait a bit, you fellows.... Here is
Moscow? What a queer idea! What had they to be afraid of?”
Denísov’s case, when hasty steps and the jingling of spurs were heard
and Preussisch-Eylau, was concentrated near Bartenstein. It was awaiting
infantry to shoot or horsemen to ride down the Russian infantry—all
Pierre, perplexed, looked round with his shortsighted eyes without
Moscow. The remembrance of the Rostóvs’ house and of his childish
marshal of the court, Count Tolstóy.
CHAPTER XVIII
Prince Andrew was watching these men abashed by the Emperor’s
perished with each additional day it remained in Moscow. But it did not
“Yes, from Olmütz,” he answered, with a sigh.
which was carpeted with red baize, and not only gendarmes but dozens of
In the evening Michael Ivánovich, sent by the prince, came to Princess
“May the kingdom of Heaven be his! God’s will be done to us all!” He
learn from Suvórov even so simple a thing as the art of crowing like a


the form in which he had expressed his thoughts, but displeased that
cook.


not satisfied, let us have a bunt of our own. That’s all wight. Je suis

before tears gushed from his eyes and he concluded in a trembling

who had sheltered in the village houses. They all rushed out of
major-domo made a significant and stern gesture to them both to go away.
and turned to him. Hardly had Balashëv begun to speak before a look of

critical moment the courier who carried the news of our victory at
would at last start on that path of regeneration and on the actively
Prince Andrew without lifting his eyes rode hastily away from the

in his letter to Napoleon, because with his characteristic tact he felt
prospect of spending an evening with a poor invalid is not too terrible,
all regular Germans.”
and salt. Sulphur is of an oily and fiery nature; in combination with
Nine days after the abandonment of Moscow, a messenger from Kutúzov
of earth were already being thrown over the whole body. One of the
“Very good?” said Natásha reproachfully, noticing her brother’s
“You may go. I don’t need you to tell me what to do!” exclaimed
all that the peasants had has been eaten up. I myself will remain in
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAR AND PEACE ***
“Father! Andrew!”—said the ungraceful, awkward princess with such
him with an apprehensive glance of inquiry. There were tears in Rostóv’s
the French were still regarded with mingled feelings of anger, contempt,
Borís’ uniform, spurs, tie, and the way his hair was brushed were all
Balashëv was brought in. He became still more absorbed in his task when
to be present, were still hurrying to get dressed.
The count went in first with Márya Dmítrievna, the countess followed
could disclose it to me.”
“No, there’s not much to be amused at here,” said Rostóv, and rode on a
army, he spent the night in apartments prepared for him on the estate of
expressed his feelings, and has since become famous. On returning home
twitched her hand, and his brows and lips quivered angrily.
If the conception of freedom appears to reason to be a senseless

“But why didn’t you tell me, Drónushka? Isn’t it possible to help them?

“If at least we had some women here; but there’s nothing foh one
with rapid rhythmic whistle flew over the heads of the horsemen and fell
The regimental commander was afraid he might be blamed for this and did
position j’ai des devoirs,” * said Hélène changing from Russian, in
Sónya began watching her friend still more attentively and noticed that
“The doctor says that he is not in danger,” said the countess, but as
his fate. And I?... and he is still alive and gay!”
for the accommodation of the visitors and their belongings.
His remembering such a small detail of everyday life astonished
had been sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook Prince
During that stay in Petersburg, Borís became an intimate in the
had noticed her in the theater and said of her: “C’est un superbe
you.”
A pleasant feeling of excitement and an expectation of something
all she knew or not; she seemed to feel that before those luminous eyes
position.”

had noticed on many of the faces he had met came into his face.

and crowding on the dam that was being attacked that if Raévski did lead
Aren’t there plenty of troops on the march? Let him in, indeed! That’s
that very instant a cloud of smoke spread all round, firing was heard
“If I were asking you to do something disagreeable now—but I only ask

“What does he want the bits for?” said Karatáev. “They’d make fine leg

CHAPTER XII

that of a force commensurate with the movement observed.
     *(3) Hollow.
in too”—different voices were saying in the crowd, as the men looked
Balashëv had seen at the court of the Emperor of Russia—were waiting.
say when it was decided to abandon Moscow, so it is impossible to say
involuntary shudder ran down his spine. In the corporal’s changed face,
Paris, quite clear and very pleasing.


CHAPTER II
Andrew’s room with a preoccupied air and at once began talking. He

stoutness, which caused her to protrude her chest and stomach and throw

neither I nor my mother would ever ask or take anything from him.”
to be all right,” Pierre concluded, and followed Anna Mikháylovna.
at intervals, and the bullets passed somewhere in the fog singing in
“No, Sónya, I can’t any longer!” she said. “I can’t hide it
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
expect it will go hard with him.”

Pierre’s mind, and then he remembered his benefactor at Torzhók. And now
There were many things Pétya wanted to say to the drummer boy, but did
him since he was so high.” She held her hand a couple of feet from the
the fulfillment of duty, he rose to see some visitors off and, stroking
her fortune and my good management we can get along nicely. I am not
Dólokhov was of medium height, with curly hair and light-blue eyes. He
Natásha did not like the visitor’s tone of condescension to childish
doctor who had entered the hall after him (they had met at the last post
“I’ll send someone at once. He shall be taken away—taken away at
should be performed. In her view the aim of every religion was merely



Fóka, the butler, was the most ill-tempered person in the house.
about your mother? It would kill her, that’s one thing. And what sort of

qualities that had been a hindrance, if not actually harmful, to him in
Sónya while the china was being packed and tried to help, but soon gave
or not rubbed fine enough. After these fits of irritability her face
After the encounter at Vyázma, where Kutúzov had been unable to hold
“Uncle” played another song and a valse; then after a pause he
to be a matter of indifference whether we understand the meaning of
at the entrance.
name-day party.
“I say, do you remember our discussion in Petersburg?” asked Pierre,
out, and the strange face was before him. Prince Andrew collected all
The party was very successful and quite like other parties he had
Prince Vasíli became thoughtful and frowned. Anna Mikháylovna saw that
young girls ready for anything and full of hope—experienced the same
    CHAPTER V

was speaking hurriedly, evidently afraid her strength might fail

undo the buttons of his clothes and undressed him. The doctor bent
which the man was placed whose action is being judged, and according
attention to his story.

calèche. She knew it was right in front.
which by this time there were now Russian and now French soldiers,
to the deceased filled the house rented by the Rostóvs. All these
and as is always the case, not a single column reached its place at the
occupied near Kalúga.
All that is accessible to man is the relation of the life of the bee to
“But where is Sónya?”
have liked “Uncle.” “And then I was saying to myself all the way,
development by Napoleon’s caprice. The ideas of the Revolution and the
the best man in the world and free, he would ask on his knees for her
and he looks a regular buffoon!”

“But can this be compared...?” said Pierre.
borzois gain on him, and, finally having chosen his direction and

occupied by the enemy, and thereby averting danger from Túla and other

the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work,


“I wanted to listen at the door, but I knew you would tell me.”
I have just saved from the flames,” said he. “Good-by!” And without
by love. But she could not pray that her enemies might be trampled under

all causes. But there are laws directing events, and some of these laws
same voice as in the regiment, but Rostóv noticed sadly that under this
with Shinshín. Berg gave his arm to Véra. The smiling Julie Karágina
“Well, go on, go on!”
but he probably was not even aware of it.




Dunyásha....”

seats in the dining room, according to their rank and importance: the
events may be explained by the fact that certain persons treated one
a seventy-pound weight were tied to it. He could run no more. The
be ready to fulfill His will.” With this consoling thought (but
Do palace revolutions—in which sometimes only two or three people take
“De Bal-machève!” said the King (overcoming by his assurance the

doesn’t make a mess of things!”
coming for me to take me there.”
donned a jacket he wore only in town and went out on business. It was a

be so! But I—what is to become of me?” thought he. He had the
of speech, and their judgment of what was good and bad. Only when he
almost happy tears.
the holy of holies of the order. This was the authentic Scotch Acts
sailing as if unveiling the stars. Sometimes it looked as if the clouds
“Oh, there was childish love?” suddenly asked Prince Andrew,


journey, this feeling that Providence was intervening in her personal
a pale set face, but not at all shamefaced as Pierre expected to find
young man speaking about her in too loud a whisper.
patience, trying to divert his mother’s attention to another topic.
but at that moment the thought occurred to her that her fate would be
CHAPTER V
the right place for it.
he nevertheless intended to pardon. Pierre remained silent. “I am well
CHAPTER XI
with new people outside the ordinary routine of her life. She and Mávra
When an apple has ripened and falls, why does it fall? Because of its
Natásha went to the table and without a moment’s reflection wrote
hope. Sónya and Natásha were nursing him.
that covered her head, embraced her, pressed her to him, and kissed her
finish, and laughed at everything.

The general had so wished to do this and was so sorry he had not managed
one can answer for himself.”
superintendent of the work, should in an access of zeal plaster over the
put off her departure, and for three weeks looked after Natásha as if
“The doubt is flattering,” said “the man of profound intellect,”
conversation very well, but at the very last moment, just when he rose,
to do with her? She is like a mad woman when you are away. Doesn’t see

words what they understood.
part in the battle knew it.
French families. He is one of the genuine émigrés, the good ones. And

said that the festering might take a normal course. Then fever set in,
now we shall get anything we want from his hothouses. I have to see him


“Well, my dear boy, I hear you’ve been educated abroad, not taught
Golítsyn and he has refused. Be the kindhearted man you always were,”
Dmítrievna told him in secret, poisoned herself the night after she had
Légion d’honneur), the monarch came out into the porch, putting on
the sly what was left in the glasses. From the third room came sounds of
evidently in a fit of rage, his coal-black eyes with their bloodshot

cure. And I am also very much afraid for him spiritually. He has not a
For a long time Pierre could not understand, but when he did, he jumped
usual in French, and as if after long self-restraint she wished to make
are you very much in love?”
Andrew noticed how her thin arms rose quickly as if to embrace her
him.
sill. “Listen!” cried he, standing there and addressing those in the
Russians and salutary for the French. If the position of the Russian
ought to go straight to him and give the message Dolgorúkov had ordered
a particular glamour and glad keenness of impression to everything that
“No—promise that you will not refuse! It will give you no trouble
When Márya Dmítrievna told Natásha that Anatole was married, Natásha
a capacity to select and absorb the very best a man shows of himself.
“Don’t laugh, stop!” cried Natásha. “You’re shaking the whole

“It was a ruble an arshin, I suppose?”


men. Natásha, on the other hand, having put on her best gown, was in
fellow like that Schwa’tz!” he cried.
twenty-sixth.
hand, impelled by instinctive fear, squeezed his throat ever tighter and
brightened. He kissed the countess’ hand and Natásha’s, and sat


“He must keep order, keep the law, that’s what the government is there
and ivy, with a gleam of white shoulders, glossy hair, and sparkling
whole government! And what a government! They see treason everywhere and
he would slap in the face before the Emperor. Suddenly a distant shout
“I give my word of honor as a Wussian officer,” said Denísov, “that I

known). Drawing nearer, he recognized in the Rhetor a man he knew,
Whether we speak of the migration of the peoples and the incursions


this.
to enter into conversation with this old man, but, submitting to him

Métivier, shrugging his shoulders, went up to Mademoiselle Bourienne

committed in conquered countries. The first people to go away were the
singers.
again become what she had been at the ball.


vivandière, and like matters.
spend time in reading what is unintelligible and can therefore bear
were everywhere. Pierre pushed forward as fast as he could, and the
“But seriously,” said Prince Andrew, “we can at any rate say


on all sides, had stopped because a horse in front had fallen under a

its usual semblance of a smile.
not only shall we have no need to see exceptional ability and genius in

to run into some expense for the sake of good society—that Pierre

“Prince, humanum est errare, * but...” replied the doctor,
proclamation which he had dictated straight off without corrections. It
the advantages are far less than in the infantry. Just consider my own

side. Though the condition and numbers of the French army were unknown


“I might ask,” he thought, “but they’ll say: ‘He’s a boy himself and so
nonsense, but we are friends forever. She, if she loves anyone, does it
of the campaign that the historians tell us how Milorádovich should have
When Borís, who was to be served up to the guests, entered the drawing


if he had come out of a Russian bath—in a short coat and with his hair
“Nothing, nothing.” She smiled at Pierre through her tears. “Good night!
memories of old age, but poetic, youthful ones—those impressions of
The question was no longer whether this was possible, but only which was
“What right has he not to wish to receive me into his family? Oh,
yourself, put a bridle on your senses, and seek blessedness, not in
shako, carefully loosened the gathers of its lining and drew them tight
blindman’s buff, in which two players are blindfolded and one of
incidents of the war,” says Thiers, narrating this episode. In
all his belongings to his neighbor, and doubts on which he tried not to

he appeared before notre très gracieux souverain * with the news of the
    CHAPTER XI

“No, don’t!” he exclaimed with a frown. “You go, Michael Ivánovich.”

themselves, stifle this remorse and grow callous, as a result of being
offended tone; and still more offended that they all remained silent,
immediately.
smiled and interrupted him.
near the strange lady. Prince Vasíli in front of the door, near the

him, and I will tell Papa!” said Sónya resolutely.
wrong and that to discuss the bad news was difficult, and so it was best

When the boy had entered the hut, Pétya sat down at a distance from
smile.
was a misfortune but it turned out a blessing! If it had not been for



intending to marry her would be dishonorable. Borís made up his mind
Moscow and the position of our army, round which he had ridden. Prince
“Inform the prince and princess that I knew nothing: I acted on the
troops advanced on Borodinó from their left.

“Yes... I... I... I wished for his death! Yes, I wanted it to end
nonsense... but this is real.... Now then, Natásha, now then, dearest!
garden.
had needlessly plunged into the river should be enrolled in the Légion
“Be so good as to step in. Makár Alexéevich, the brother of my late
And Pierre, anxiously trying to remember whether he had done anything
This reply of Balashëv’s, which hinted at the recent defeats of the
scoundrels.”
dispatch and verbal instructions, galloped off to the General Staff
avenue at a gallop.

When we do not at all understand the cause of an action, whether a
she would not be happy. Before Natásha had finished singing,
began to think of him, the recollection of the old prince, of Princess
terribly tangled skein of life which previously had terrified him was
Sokólniki after the duel and had spent that first agonizing, sleepless
without asking Napoleon and issued orders where and in what direction to
hazard.
addressing the mother.

and it is all I!” thought Pierre. “And they caught all that and put it
increases my astonishment. I am sending this by Adjutant-General Prince
“Ah, don’t talk to me! Last winter she wheedled herself in here and
mud, defiled in fours and moved along the broad road planted with birch
marry.... And I am sure there will not be a happier man than you.”
Hendríkhovna’s hand, and that the “Booby” should go to refill and reheat
regularity in his household was carried to the highest point of
“Your name?” asked Davout.
“Into action! Into action! Bring him a bottle for such news! But how
showing sympathy with them. Yet Pierre’s cunning consisted simply in
fellow you are for dancing!”

“Kindly step in, my orders are to bring you in.”
own eyes she comforted the count, and decided that at dinner and till
“Wait a moment, I’ll get my work.... Now then, what are you
aid. “I have nothing to do with him and I only wanted to see the

When the Military Governor had gone, Prince Vasíli sat down all alone


Davout looked up and gazed intently at him. For some seconds they looked
running away?”
of a new gallery or conservatory, the inauguration of a private theater
merry reminiscences.
they were firing at could not be seen for the smoke which there was no
staircase and out into the yard. No one had seen him. But there were

and giving orders, for which everyone came to her, occupied her all day.
“We don’t do the French any harm,” said Tíkhon, evidently frightened by

emulation in pursuit of commendation and rewards, which recognize it.
“Women’s fuss, women’s fuss!” said Alpátych.
which he had come out was thronged with calèches, carriages of all
relations with Nicholas in Vorónezh she was shy about doing so. Making

fought on a chosen and entrenched position with forces only slightly
have secrets from your mother.”


as impracticable, he arranged for the erection of large

“Why, so as not to lay waste the country we were abandoning to the
Dron.) Princess Mary raised herself on the sofa on which she had been
Pierre saw that Borís wished to change the subject, and being of the
question for whose sake he came (though no one spoke of it) was soon
“And so he is! Quite blind!”
turn: that a court-martial had been appointed, and that in view of the

vous aime’?” he kept repeating to himself. And when he had said it
and acquired the serenity that comes with years. People talked about
They had an opportunity that day to send letters to the army, and the
their woolen stockings to the earthen floor and began putting on his

assurance that you will find protection! Markets are established in the
door. “And Sónya! They are lovely!”


standing motionless; then he came to the region occupied by Uvárov’s
     * (2) “It is all very well for that good-for-nothing fellow
happening in front of him. Nesvítski with an angry face, red and unlike
the whole day on horseback inspecting the locality, considering plans
“Oh, that is dreadful, dreadful!” said Pierre. “I don’t
home. Should he go to headquarters next day and challenge that affected
his strength before he could go on. A door opened to the right, and an
generals, officers, and soldiers, and never contradicted those who tried
have to prove to them what he had not merely convinced himself of, but
silken hangings. On leaving the bed both Prince Vasíli and the princess
Rostóv looked at him, trying to remember where he had seen him before.
times repeated—of a sonata by Dussek.
that is, never in the way people devised, but flowing always from the
apportioned and put to proper use fall into the hands of another, and

“Pierre! Been back long?” someone shouted. Pierre raised his head. In
said she.
shoulders raised. His lips are firmly closed, his eyes glitter, and a
the crowd, and the people rushed toward the reader.

which lay under his head. Nicholas turned with a tender smile on his
“I am sorry, for I need you. But you’re right, you’re right! It’s not

evidently he alone was not seeking anything for himself, nursed no

morsels. The group about Mortemart immediately began discussing the

conscious in himself is impossible, and that his every action depends
aches, and one spends all one’s money. He asked me for tonight, but I
word of command the expression of cheerful serenity on the faces of
suddenly appeared senseless. He unexpectedly felt himself ridiculous,
link which other people recognized had grown up between himself and
which held him in their power.... The ten fell to him.
had already begun to disconcert him. Now this world disconcerted him no
the report of musketry.
him. He wrote to Arakchéev, the Emperor’s confidant: “It must be as
therefore fought against Napoleon. In 1807 he suddenly made friends
little tufts. He entered the room, looking restlessly and angrily
without knowing why, she felt it very difficult to speak of the
bound by her marriage?

proceeded to his study.
have sent to ask. I think you must be tired, Princess.”
silent, waiting for what he would say.
Pierre went to the right, and unexpectedly encountered one of Raévski’s
we really lost? Master!...”
bee. But the ultimate purpose of the bee is not exhausted by the first,
that he was at the front and in the power of a man toward whom he now

keeping till I should be in bed. The bolts? No, I told him about them.
“Yes, bring some.”

chair, wrapped in a powdering mantle, entrusting his head to Tíkhon.
been settled once for all till death and that to change it was not in
those smoke clouds sometimes ran and sometimes stood still while woods,
what is unknown we call free will. Free will is for history only an
authorities, projects, counsels, threats, and deceptions and is
The young count paid no heed to them, but, breathing hard, passed by
conversation with Karatáev the day before.
ears. It was evident to the dogs, the hunters, and to the wolf herself

Pierre admitted that it was true, and from that was gradually led by
days of her girlhood, but I know what she is like every time we receive

The Russian Emperor’s aide-de-camp is an impostor. Officers are

and got used to the idea that no one would oblige him to go anywhere
orders the sergeant to be arrested. Come, you must own that this affair
than it was in Egypt, in Italy, in Austria, and in Prussia. We do not


Rostóvs’ yard. Mávra Kuzmínichna concluded that he was a very important
“Come, my dear Anna Mikháylovna, let Catiche do as she pleases. You

the deliverance of Russia from hostile invasion.
did not cry any more, but prayed continually, turning in soul to that
it was evident that he was old and stupid and that they, though not in
drives me to it!” And suddenly with a determination he himself did not
regard to this project of marriage for me, I will tell you, dear sweet


former adorer.
fixed on her.

since the beginning of the war.
when you are going to this terrible war, and he is so old? Mademoiselle
them?” exclaimed Prince Andrew in a shrill, piercing voice. “Ah, my
go off by themselves in different directions hoping to find food and
significance of that immense and wealthy city being given over to
said it, and they all felt awkward.
part in it by self-sacrifice and heroism were the most useless members


beside Vereshchágin.

heal and its edges join, physical and spiritual wounds alike can yet
Emperor—and but one fear—to fail to please him. The result of that
It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such abstract
has to admit an unexplained force acting on the resultant. And that is
pondered. Sometimes he staked a large sum, but Dólokhov refused to
continued to explain his views in French, every now and then turning to




the dinner sat silent, glancing with a frightened look now at her
reality again presented itself. He got up without saying a word and went
“We’ll reckon up! Well, have you been to the Governor’s?” asked
“Leave me alone, please leave me alone! It is all quite the same to

When Rostóv went back there was a bottle of vodka and a sausage on the
Goliath. Preserve his army, put a bow of brass in the hands of those who
printed on ordinary Russian paper) of General Rameau’s, telling people
something else. But receiving no orders, he remained for some time in
took her old ball dress, and fell into a reverie quite unrelated to what
all associated files of various formats will be found in:        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/0/2600/
Just as before, they never mentioned him so as not to lower (as they

needs most deeply devised plans and profound scientific knowledge and

went about the rooms fashionably dressed but looking sad and dull. Here,
In the Rostóvs’ staid old-fashioned house the dissolution of former
“Then they’ve not gone to bed yet? What do you think? Mind now,
provinces as I gave him Finland. Yes,” he went on, “I promised and would
“What did I tell about Kutúzov?” Prince Vasíli now said with a

Emperor’s eyes met Rostóv’s and rested on them for not more than

become not merely meaningless but contemptible and ridiculous, and to
Scoundrels!” yelled Kutúzov in a hoarse voice, waving his arms and
the expression with which he frowned and looked away Pierre thought he
Thursday—sold flour to the army at nine rubles a sack. Will you have
letting her and her parents feel that the childish relations between

officers (of whom there are fewer) perform the action itself less
In the letter from his parents was enclosed a letter of recommendation
straight into Pierre’s face. He glanced at the dirty innyard in the
thyself whether thou art content with thyself. What hast thou attained
put A in B’s place and B in D’s, or on the contrary to put D in A’s
guess what he wanted; she pointed first to Pierre, then to some drink,
her life in fear and constant suffering. Mademoiselle Bourienne was
who was pawing the ground and champing his bit. At last all were
which he began to be conscious. He did not like to agree with him in
Met by this difficulty historians of that class devise some most

begin,” he whispered, and taking up his glass, he rose. All were
could not be sure what change there was in his face. All she could see
hear more went to the door of the room opposite the innkeeper’s, where

what’s one to do?” and, having given his order, he returned to

if the peasant is naked and hungry and has only one miserable horse, he

time. No, I’ll tell you now. You know Sónya’s my dearest friend.
them.
Gerásim gazed at the officer with an alarmed and inquiring look.
another and Kutúzov most of all. Anticipation that the failure of
    CHAPTER IX

object above his head and, holding it there for some seconds, suddenly
with you alone! God knows how long we may again be parted. You are not
were flocking in to look at him. Prince Bagratión was thanking the
Germans.

who had formerly seemed to her so unapproachable and important and was
familiar gallop of coquetry, without any ulterior motive or any
leaders serves as an expression of the people’s will or only some part
square in front of the Bazaar were drummers beating the muster call.
“Use your finger, Mary Hendríkhovna, it will be still nicer,” said

for her son, kept demanding now a carriage (which they did not keep) to
up the steps of the back porch.
anything more. Even Mamma does not understand. It is wonderful how
do it.”
said the old princess.
and at the table... who do you think? No, but wait a bit!... Who is it


surprised them all. Nicholas was himself rather surprised at the way he
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
give contradictory replies to that question, while the historians of
here.”
of paper money. Anatole, with uniform unbuttoned, walked to and fro from
being formed. But now they have had him transferred to my regiment and
Alpátych, arriving from the devastated Bald Hills estate, sent for his
false paper money, and worst of all they kill my children and my

himself—who was fond of parleys with the French, sent envoys demanding
actuated by a real desire for peace.
interesting but hardly feasible.”
considered myself injured, and Louis XVI was executed because they
“Yes, I do wish it,” said he.
and inhuman role predestined for him.
and indignity.
a great effort he tried to return to life and to see things from their

“You are seeking for truth in order to follow its laws in your life,

had long been sinning against himself.
do like this.”
dinner,” cried several voices. “We’ll take you in hand.”
They have torn my body. The kingdom of God will be overthrown... Thrice

speak with equal power in the human soul: one very reasonably tells a
any of you!”
the opposite,” replied Bennigsen.
insisted on having the pieces returned that were left over and asked
The prince’s tone was so calm and confident that Princess Mary
“There is only one Paris in the world. You have been to Paris and have
have used his Old Guards, who were intact, and the battle would have
not fond of Nicholas Bolkónski but was always anxious to recognize that
old retainers of the Bourbons knew how to make, and approached him,
and in a way of which our last campaign can give you no idea. Half the
chose and placed cards, and watched those broad-boned agile hands in the
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
dangerous she became to men, and the more freely they could associate
boston at the clubs. With an incessant hum of voices the crowd advanced
driver in his bast shoes ran panting up to it, placed a stone under one
“Oh, it’s terrible to feel oneself so in this man’s power,”
anyone else does the same, I will pay him a hundred imperials. Do you
length portrait of Catherine the Great. The same people were still
glass. She went on reading:
payments had been diminished by a third, their obligatory manorial work
and historical causes of the action, and the simpler the action we are
set to work I shall do it as no one else could, but now I can jest, and
inner harmony which had so impressed him in the soldiers at the battle
and glory to whoever captures him,’ he says. This is what his cajolery
the Hofkriegsrath and both Emperors took part. At that council, contrary
“You flirt with him too,” said the countess, laughing.
heard the rustle of the cockroaches and the buzzing of the fly that
While the couples were arranging themselves and the musicians tuning up,
troops on the high ground above the bridge involuntarily asked himself
The great natural forces lie outside us and we are not conscious of


guns on the hillock.
and alarmed at the feeling she was aware of in herself. “And could we
And strange to say Nicholas felt that he could not help taking up a

That Sunday, the Rostóvs went to Mass at the Razumóvskis’ private chapel
His face suddenly softened and tears came into his eyes. With his left
yesterday’s interview with Anatole.
Moscow, and the most diverse people met at their suppers. Country
burden as quickly as possible, on the third day after his arrival he
it or not, and how they would cross it, agitated them all.
a whole life for the sake of amusing yourself! Amuse yourself with women

Arbát Street.

to the gate. A retreating regiment, thronging and hurrying, blocked the
behind. One of them said something strange, not in Russian. In among the
their assistance. The majority struggled back to the bank from which
Frenchmen, with the politeness characteristic of his countrymen,
“As one community, without distinction of class, without enmity, united
my dear sir, it is only in the midst of worldly cares that we can attain
shining eyes and experienced a sense of comfort. “But isn’t it all the
without omitting her duties as hostess, threw significant glances from


would be wiser for him to leave Petersburg. Pierre proposed going to his
to start her gambols again and display her kittenish nature.
that this was unnecessary.
Rostóv felt ill at ease. He tried, but failed, to find some joke with
whose notes were familiar to him, by the way the voices of the huntsmen
became more and more entangled. It seemed to her mother and Sónya that
of the Gospel truth which has become for me a principle of life: not
consider my sympathy misplaced, but I was mistaken,” and suddenly her

fire, for Moscow had to burn as every village, factory, or house must
din of shouting more incessant. Soldiers floundering knee-deep in mud
“Come now, just this one more little card!”
before her whom he loved and who loved him? Had he expected to live he
    CHAPTER XI
closer together and a report spread that they were ordered to halt:
and the crackling of dry branches.
on what he thought right. The steward promised to do all in his power to
continued their prayers without looking at him.
all the peasants had assembled at the barn by the princess’ order and
addressed an edifying exhortation to them. He imagined to himself
that’s starving us?” shouted Denísov, hitting the table with the
even every footstep in that house since the terrible news had come, so

smilingly raising a finger at him, she left the room.
“Ah, a weapon?” said the officer and turned to the barefooted soldier
right side of the field fully satisfied his expectations. Nowhere
his pistol. So now the general explicitly forbade his taking part in any
dislodge them for lack of troops, the men are running away and it is
Pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room, in which were the
email business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact
dying,” replied the maid with a sigh.
On reaching the vestibule Natásha saw a tall figure in a fur coat
How stupid you men all are not to have married her! Excuse me for saying
stretchers from the battery. Pierre again went up onto the knoll where
minister’s son was, with his rosy cheeks and dark eyebrows, and with
also through the Catholic clergy, offer praise because on that same
emotion of a man re-experiencing in recollection strong impressions he
“Bwing the prisoner here,” said Denísov in a low voice, not taking his
Once more something whistled, but this time quite close, swooping
count with a gloved finger, and paying no attention to those who had
After the return of Alpátych from Smolénsk the old prince suddenly
himself might not be pleasant to someone else.


“So they will,” said Nesvítski. “No, but what I should like,”
quivering faster than before and his face seemed petrified in its stern

so beautiful that very often in spite of the plainness of her face

her mother, Natásha got up and went to the door.
position is now a terrible one,” continued Anna Mikháylovna, sadly,
officer arrived, but at a sign resumed his measured, monotonous pacing.
twenty thousand strong, might easily have made that effort. The French
Andrew was natural and pleasant. Others, the majority, disliked him and
that everything was splendid. “Just fancy: wants to be an hussar.
“Has he taken his medicine?”
ground, clouds of powder smoke seemed continually to spring up out of
passing the time pleasantly. Every visitor who came to the house paid
A little later when he went up to the large circle, Anna Pávlovna said
saddle sore which, coming after all my previous journeys, quite prevents
But before the whip could reply, the hare, scenting the frost coming
afterwards acquired, he could not have had a better or more profound
“Can a sleigh pass?” he asked his overseer, a venerable man,
As is usually the case with people meeting after a prolonged separation,

Wolzogen and Clausewitz accompanied by a Cossack. They rode close by
he reeled and sank on the snow.
On our right flank commanded by Bagratión, at nine o’clock the battle
“Well, I am glad to see you,” Denísov interrupted him, and his face
The Emperor, with the agitation of one who has been personally
of Oldenburg’s territory, and even...” Count Rostopchín paused,

Next day toward evening the princess set off, and Pierre’s head steward
rapturously at him with wide-open eyes. “Will you believe it,
Napoleon rode on, dreaming of the Moscow that so appealed to his


study. Sónya sat in the drawing room at the round table, copying a
It was far from being the same words or the same order that reached the

Tears suddenly rose in her eyes, she turned away, lifted her music

self-satisfied.
mother city, must feel her feminine character, and Napoleon felt it.
self-abasement.
the princess’ eyes grew dim, she could not see and could not hear
Tíkhon followed behind and Pétya heard the Cossacks laughing with him
about whom they both knew, had moved with her cubs to the Otrádnoe
that when we are thrown out of our usual ruts all is lost, but it is
particularly cold, stern, and above all unpleasantly logical.

Little Nicholas and his education, her brother Andrew, and religion
Pierre, and he gazed with his eyes fixed on the red reflection of the
parents, and leave it to me. I will tell her when I can. I wish it to
“But is it possible that all is really ended?” asked Pierre.
“Well, young man?” he said with a sigh, and from under his lifted
the army and a lengthening of its marches, whereas the only reasonable
the door into the part of the hut where Prince Andrew lay. It was dark
room at nine in the morning.
“But, my dear,” said Prince Vasíli suddenly, clutching the little

in which it has not been possible to retain many troops; for with the
old prince understood from this official report that our army had been
destroyed all his mental edifices, no longer existed for him. To that
But after the night in Mytíshchi when, half delirious, he had seen her
auditor told you it was a bad business.”
and was herself horrified at what she had said.
have said. And he was still more angry at having omitted to say it. He
“Good night, Lise,” said he, rising and courteously kissing her hand
young men, possible suitors, who sometimes appeared at their house. She
The posts left vacant by Bagratión, who had been killed, and by
a dead body; then he gradually recovered and went with me into my study
CHAPTER XV
Sixth Chasseurs whom they had just passed. Prince Andrew was struck by

to ma chère, ma tendre, ma pauvre mère * —he decided that he would
“Mamma, one need not be ashamed of his being a widower?”
noticed the quivering of Napoleon’s left leg which increased the more
took him unawares and he suddenly felt the ground slip away from under
Like the others, Anna Pávlovna Schérer showed Pierre the change of
of three rubles a week made to officers); with his strength, which he

to the Emperors that Rostóv, standing in the front row, was afraid he
In his large study, the walls of which were hung to the ceiling with
a movement among the peasants to emigrate to some unknown “warm rivers.”
“No prisoners!” said he, repeating the aide-de-camp’s words. “They
“No, pardon me, I won’t go now till the child is better,” thought
fixed in a chosen spot, vigorously holding its tail erect, shining and

“Where is it? Where?” said Pierre.
of fugitives, Prince Andrew, trying to keep near Kutúzov, saw on the
wishing to flatter Anna Pávlovna by defending her former position on

wrote about “conjugal duties.”
begun to think of the last station and was still pondering on the same
that this is admirable, this is glory—it resembles Caesar and Alexander
movement of the Tsar’s seemed to him enchanting.

that I would give my life twice over...” He looked at the countess,
days, while no duties were required of him, Prince Andrew rode round the
lowering his eyes, and he was going out, but became aware of an intense
with little noise within two steps of Prince Andrew and close to the

     *(4) I just ask you that.

making cheerful remarks in her agreeable voice. Princess Mary hastily
Orders by heart and know the Regulations as well as I do the Lord’s

the next higher and smaller section of the cone consists of the next
today. He has been here on leave and is taking Nicholas back with him.
Frenchman laid his hands on her head and, as she herself afterward
“Here, you of the Sixth Company! Devils that you are! Lend a hand...
“And who may you be?” one of them suddenly asked Pierre, evidently
who was kissing her hand, “you’re feeling dull in Moscow, I daresay?

can circulate and fulfill their purpose without harm to anyone and even
to write to the governor.
Orlóv never gave such a dinner as ours will be!”
Kutúzov alone would not see this and openly expressed his opinion that
for God. But how did God enjoin that law? And why was the Son...?”
Count Rostóv’s mouth watered with pleasure and he nudged Pierre, but
and took a long time settling into her place.
had sunk, her lip was drawn up, and her eyes drawn down.

brushed on the temples and sticking up in tufts behind. Though he

day he is sensible, well educated, and good-natured, and the next he’s
“Good-by, my dear fellow,” said Túshin. “Dear soul! Good-by, my




inside it was quiet and dark. For a long time Pierre did not sleep, but
turned angrily to her husband.
think so,” and so on.
“As your messenger ordered, your special beasts,” replied Balagá.
Pierre did not answer and left Rostopchín’s room more sullen and angry
another’s eyes—and what had seemed impossible and remote suddenly became

home Natásha placed herself in the position of a slave to her husband,

Denísov was bandaged up again and put to bed. Next day he woke calm and
A crowd gathered round the bloodstained smith.
him,” he thought, and again he felt something terrible and monstrous
had gone to see his father, could not explain his absence to herself.
shaking the hare for the blood to drip off, and anxiously glancing round
man—Napoleon—to say that Russia remained a power because Napoleon had a
that everyone regarded the Italian in the same light, and he treated him

upon Prince Andrew, who was beside him. Seeing him, Kutúzov’s
The captain returned to the room, limping slightly and whistling a tune.

oats were standing, and some bushes near which rose the smoke of
true Gascon) and says: ‘I don’t recognize the world-famous Austrian

to anything around him, if we see his connection with anything
Everybody laughed a great deal. At the head of the table, where the

into the wing and put him in the room that had been Madame Schoss’.


“She’ll get away! No, it’s impossible!” thought Nicholas, still
When they had been announced a perturbation was noticeable among the
irreparable. There was no insult on either side. Allow me to

we had not religion to console us life would be very sad. Why do you
now they wanted her to sacrifice the very thing that constituted the
“Going already?” said he.
turned to me.” And when saying this she herself fancied she had really
difficult to execute. So fresh instructions were sent for the solution
army was asking for leave to visit Moscow and had something to do there.

Karatáev’s advice he tied with string round the ankles for warmth, and
not have done more,” said Napoleon, growing more and more excited as he
poorer brothers. I was a merchant, my dear brothers, and had much
“But I’ll send an orderly.... Two of them!” said Rostóv. “What an idea,

all its details to the Austrian General Weyrother: a lucky accident had
impressed on them that to leave Moscow was shameful. They were ashamed
And he smiled approvingly, evidently pleased with the cadet. Rostóv
He took the lighted pipe that was offered to him, gripped it in his

hundred rubles he had a long column of figures scored against him,
retirement to Drissa was a most shameful reverse and an unbroken series
carriages in which soldiers were riding and remarked that it was a very
“Forgive me for troubling you....”
if not, they’ll know how to arrange matters.” And really, during the
    CHAPTER III
“I’ve seen him myself!”
“One!” came the command.




could find it out before others. In the figure in which he had to choose
to the left, and among the orange-colored Uhlans on chestnut horses and
between them gleamed blue infinity. He did not turn his head and did not
orderly of Denísov’s—was talking, as well as the quartermaster.
“Oh, I’m all right,” said he, “but why did they shoot those poor
chair beside him.
knees and, taking his hand carefully, bent her face over it and began
screwed up his eyes, and looked intently at him.
In the second room of the inn the lieutenant was sitting over a dish of
worried by the question of what news Balashëv had brought and how he
Just then Pétya came running in from the drawing room.
acknowledged by all the religions and all the thinkers, but has never
the rearguard and have an eye on the order of retreat, “which is also
pain in his wounded leg, gazed with wide-open eyes at this strange

God, without Whose care not a hair of man’s head can fall?

at Natásha’s door, resolved to safeguard her, it was to have been
from excitement, asked the aide-de-camp whether he would be permitted
be completely upset.

him with her kindly, slightly quizzical, happy smile.

department. Lanskóy informed the commander in chief that the army
To expiate his huntsman’s offense, Ilágin pressed the Rostóvs to
they appear.
saved your life, and I save your honor!” Having repeated these words the

and involuntary.
who discussed Russia’s position at the time involuntarily introduced

to compensate for that expenditure, the intoxicating honors he received

ceased keeping a diary, avoided the company of the Brothers, began going
the table, screened by a bound music book so that the light did not fall
your family and all the property... They’ve brought us to utter ruin!
“You promised Countess Rostóva to marry her and were about to elope with
at the sound and then, smiling at his own sensations, stood still. The

institutions in Moscow he mentally decided that he would shower favors
Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall, and, turning his shoulders
“I don’t understand, Mamma—what is his attitude to Pierre?”
to me to be good or bad, I must admit that besides these things the
prince.

The colonel rode to the front, angrily gave some reply to questions put
villages were in a state of the greatest poverty. He did not know that
longer and went on, between gasps of laughter: “And the whole world
the position was finishing his savory dinner. They waited for him from

“Handsome, isn’t she?” he whispered to Natásha.

dressing stations the grass and earth were soaked with blood for a space
“and tell Mademoiselle Bourienne not to come to me,” she added, hearing
The old prince was very affectionate and careful in his treatment of
dissatisfaction with the Russian government. Judging by the calmly
“Tomorrow our squadron is to be in reserve. May I ask to be attached


she turned to his father. The conversation was general and animated,
Natásha had told him that she had rejected Bolkónski.

“You go ahead, Zakhár!” shouted Nicholas to his father’s
desire to serve, not sparing their lives, and it is not any kind of

life was very hard, but he also knew that he could not help tormenting
Russia!”
squeaking over the snow. Natásha and Sónya, holding up their dresses,
much wrinkled and his eyes deep set. His hair had evidently been hastily
it, covering his face with his hands.
a young girl who stood panting, having just run in through the cold from
and respect as few hardhearted men would have aroused. Although he was
finish because their eyes meeting said the rest.
to say. So little was his rejoinder appreciated that Napoleon did not
descended the porch steps.
remember her gave him pleasure, and when his comrades, hearing of his
“Come on then,” cried Pierre. “Come on!... And we’ll take Bruin
round and clapping Rostóv on the shoulder with his big hand.
The instructions to Alpátych took over two hours and still the prince
“Count Peter Kirílovich! How did you get here?” said a voice.
appeared shy of her unquestionable and all too victorious beauty. She
He glanced at Prince Andrew’s face and quickly turned away.
friend, that I look on marriage as a divine institution to which we must
the first couple. Noiselessly, skillfully stepping with his little
question. All the contradictions and obscurities of history and the
There were only three tumblers, the water was so muddy that one could
he had to deliver to them from the highest leaders of their order. The
“She has written to you. How she torments herself, poor thing! She’s
Natásha, who was exceptionally graceful, was first, even danced the pas
to his horse’s mane and pulled up beside the hussar. He was succumbing
Kutúzov walked slowly and languidly past thousands of eyes which were
from the army to Sergéy Kuzmích, in which the Emperor said that he was
rather confine ourselves to studying those sublime rules which our
“Forward, with God!” said Bagratión, in a resolute, sonorous voice,


even pushed aside, he began wrapping it round the princess. Either from
and an officer gave the word “Fire!” This was followed by two whistling
Duroc said that Napoleon would receive the Russian general before going
Sobbing, she kissed and comforted Natásha. “If only he lives!” she
the count was beginning to breathe heavily and quickly which was always

highest point. “It’s in charge of the queer fellow we saw without
Prince Andrew involuntarily watched as one does watch the hands of


to the Emperor Francis; he remembered the Minister of War, the polite
heaven’s name! Go out into the frost... the frost... the frost!”
himself, Prince Bagratión sent Zherkóv to tell the general in command

staff...”
words to some of the generals, and, recognizing the former commander of
Prince Vasíli wished to obtain this post for his son, but others were
to recognize his genius as the only explanation of the war carried on
up to the picket ropes and a crowd of hussars surrounded them.
don’t forget to put out my new coat,” added Rostóv, fingering his
there is any misunderstanding and discord between you and Mary, I can’t
commander among them! Hm!...”
voice. “I have had so little happiness in life that every loss is hard
    CHAPTER XXXIII
with a piece of (broken but mended) glass in it for a window. When it
vanished from his face.
    * “Good day, gentlemen.”

the color of muddy water. At times a sort of mist descended, and then
never many people in the church; Natásha always stood beside Belóva in
rule. In proportion to the defeat of the Austrian army Austria loses
officer, who thrust his head out of the door, that warlike feeling of
Where Willarski saw deadness Pierre saw an extraordinary strength and
of genius with a whole series of extraordinary chances that this ram,
visited the Foundling Hospital and, allowing the orphans saved by him
is transferred to historic personages conditionally, but that the
and most painfully. What would she not have given to bring back even a

and then at his bare feet which he placed with pleasure in various
dispersing among the shops while crowds of civilians blocked the bridge,

her half her life. When the news of Pétya’s death had come she had been


bees, by force of habit and custom cleaning out the brood cells, with
    CHAPTER II
Pierre drove up to the house of the old prince in a most serious mood.
Pierre smiled in his good-natured way as if afraid for his companion’s

escaped. The girl was shouting something but, seeing that he was a
her. Why do you say all this to me?”
knowing what to do with one another, screamed, and ran back again.
junction—though that was the chief aim of all at headquarters—because,
“I beg you not to tell anyone who I am, and to do what I ask you.”

Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
“Now I must disclose to you the chief aim of our Order,” he said,
The young officer was evidently exercising his duties for the first or
fingered his papers, closed the bureau again, and sat down at the table
carry to the Russian works, and those 102 guns shot into the air until

surprisingly good. In spite of this he was placed that day with the
everything, and put everything in its place. He will not hinder
Pfuel, Prince Andrew, thanks to his Austerlitz experiences, was able to
“What! To whom?... Nonsense!” cried the count, suddenly reddening
“Captain Ramballe, of the 13th Light Regiment, Chevalier of the Legion




“When will her mother come? She has worried me to death! Now mind, don’t



with a vigorous movement. The Emperor’s mild and handsome face was
prince, not for fear of ill-usage by him but for fear of causing him
shown, fired. Not at all expecting so loud a report, Pierre shuddered
of the war, which all these men believed they were directing; but this
thought—referring to the little princess who was not in the dining
“Why too much?... Well, what do you, what do you feel in your soul, your
began to set. The baggage carts drew up close together and the men

“Ah, I so long to like her! Tell her so if you see her before I do.”
CHAPTER XIII

distance, but down the hill before him. “It’s the French!”
us. But Vienna is on the other side. No, the bridge has not yet been
terrible news from her till after her confinement, which was expected
cough.

French!”



“Can it or can it not be?” he now thought as he looked at her and
He checked himself in the middle of the sentence, lowered his eyes to
Petersburg.
at any rate as he saw it here, sometimes seemed to him based merely
with which he was covered and, making wry faces at the noisome smell of
and his own. The blue-gray bandy legged dog ran merrily along the side

out his instructions strictly and return at once. But when he saw the
attack very long. About Túshin and the battalion that had been in

dubiously. And this silence about Dokhtúrov is the clearest testimony to
am sure my husband will consent,” said the countess, “but your
clambered onto it, seized it by the mane, and turning out his toes
Prince Vasíli smiled, and Pierre noticed that everyone was smiling at




thoughts.
town knows?”
wish the Emperors may arrange the affair between them, and that the war


    CHAPTER XIII

understand. We all profess the Christian law of forgiveness of injuries
which they hurriedly sought plausible pretexts. When he had gone, taking

the old count, and would stand for a long time holding the clothes and

things have to be put in order, and we will deal with villains in our
here and will never return? He is not here! For whom then is the trial
“Extend widely!” said Prince Andrew with an angry snort, when they had
little respite. After turning his head from right to left for some time,
old prince not only excluded her from his room, but did not admit

jaw trembling and was hardly able to mutter: “I don’t know... your

not make out to what class he could belong. The French followed him with
are you saying about the government? I don’t understand.”
smoke, rendered denser by the mist, prevented him from seeing anything

“Well? Are you satisfied now?” said he. “You’ve made me quarrel with my
thoughts, for in such matters, too, he had gained experience. He knew
day was mapped out, the prince rested and the princess played the
night; it sometimes made excursions into the town but always returned
relations, is the will of the people also transferred to their
everything, my friends, and I beg you to take everything, all our grain,
to the ladies and listened to her. In the midst of a phrase he ceased

to visit the kitchen, came up to his officer.
such efforts the enemy had fled—experienced a similar feeling of terror
without at all noticing that his involuntary smile had stabbed the heart
by two considerations: his wife’s guilt, of which after his sleepless
“Weally! And I’ve been losing, bwother. I lost yesterday like a
She went in and sat down by her husband.

in a circle of friends, and his guests, understanding his wish, tried
the frightful thing that had to happen should happen quickly. Pierre
during the five years he had known her, and how her head had cracked
been and always shall be independent; but to go against his will and
had first wanted to effect a diversion in Greece and then in Warsaw but
others. One instance, which had occurred some twenty years before, was
diplomats who are esteemed because they have certain negative qualities,

Antónov.”

He had not finished the last verse before the young people began to
“Who is it?” asked someone in the porch.
Prince Andrew went again to his wife and sat waiting in the room next


When he had reached the fence, still without finding those he sought, he
I am, etc.,
“Just wait a minute, sir. One little moment,” said she.

with a mouse.
“‘Grant leave to retire to his country seat to an old man who is
saw a closed door. Below, under the staircase, was a door leading to the
pitied him. But Uncle Nicholas came nearer and nearer to them. Terror
cathedral, and after them others in a more leisurely manner: caps were
of the Emperor’s anxiety. That day Prince Vasíli no longer boasted of
excellent. Moreover, the Rostóvs’ affairs were seriously embarrassed,
(“Arnauts” was the Tsarévich’s favorite expression when he was in
Bezúkhova. But you will understand that I have no desire for the post.
subject to the law of necessity; but it does not advance by a hair’s
Moscow, concealing his name, and must meet Napoleon and kill him, and
so strong that he could lift the back of the carriage from behind, sat
arrangements in his corner, and even in his very smell, and he looked at
wider than ours, and it was plain that they could easily outflank us
a voice from behind the fire with a repressed laugh.
her manners or with delicacy of speech, or with her toilet, or to show
She had been married during the previous winter, and being pregnant did


you were about, challenged a man you are jealous of without cause.”

of the war that had been announced in a manifesto, and about the
Denísov’s dugout with a grave and serious face and regretfully showed

during the retreat passed many positions better than Borodinó. They did
if you are in love, marry him!” said the countess, with a laugh of
and virtue than mere words. This chamber with what you see therein
they became silent, and Pierre thought he saw the princess hide

The little princess entered the room. The passage broke off in the
frightened, just got frightened and hid her face in her hands. Then he
her. No, not that, I don’t, I can’t...”
luxury, the kind of life that can be changed at any moment, was no
“Ooh, ooh, ooh!” grunted the Tartar, and suddenly lifting up his swarthy
Sometimes the old count would come up, kiss Prince Andrew, and ask
the pine forests veiled in the mist of their summits... There was peace
pose, crossing himself by shaking his hand in front of his chest
She did not answer.
party cordially welcomed and courted him, in the first place because
During that year after his son’s departure, Prince Nicholas
    CHAPTER X
Freemasonry presented itself to him.
CHAPTER XVII
Tíkhon scratched his back with one hand and his head with the other,
said, turning to an officer who wished to cut himself a piece of mutton.
of his own. The difference between his former and present self was that
BOOK SIX: 1808 - 10
to stop and fire the bridge.”
with Napoleon and had been bribed by him, and so on, and so on.

laughter. The small, muddy, green pond had risen visibly more than a

Rostóvs, and that it was impossible in their presence even to mention
anything else from a blind and depraved old man.
is all I can say.”

who kissed his hand.
well educated and clever. This is all that his foreign education has
letters to Nicholas from all the household were written and copied out,

temptation she slipped quietly behind one of the columns. In the midst



own account, and yet it was only in consequence of their going away
The French were already near. Prince Andrew, walking beside Bagratión,
Somebody after all must see to things. One misses Mítenka at such times.
“He’s coming!” shouted the signaler at that moment.

precisely when, or by whom, it was decided to move to Tarútino. Only

Military science, seeing in history innumerable instances of the fact
each ascent or descent of the road the crowds were yet denser and the
munching their oats. In the dark Pétya recognized his own horse, which
“And I did not know... Nicholas... My darling!...”
if the matter concerned some brief conflict in which only a small number
a portrait so characteristic of the original as to be amusing.
the crowd and stopped behind the priest. He crossed himself with an
full, in a pale, almost starless, spring sky. Prince Andrew leaned his
her look of gentle indifference to everything around.
a look at his Frenchman with the dimple on his chin. He was sitting in
formed a group and some soldiers crowded round them. Their faces all
Empress Marie Louise—who regarded him as her husband, though he had left
city articles kept falling, so that by midday there were instances of
that innumerable crowd of people of whom not one was nearer to him or


below.


which she was accustomed to live and loved to live. So with a joyful
began to doze. Suddenly a feeling of happiness seized him.
Rostóv’s horse was also getting restive: it pawed the frozen ground,
seemed to say, as with a scarcely perceptible smile he looked at
Several of those present smiled at Zherkóv’s words, expecting one of
“But what has happened between you?” she asked. “What has he said
something from one to another, and a page—the same one Rostóv
as on the day when Pierre had been taken from the guardhouse on the
important episode of the war of 1812 was the movement of the Russian
reckoning.”


acquaintance with the Polish landowners, preparing for reviews and being
her husband and child.
After long hesitations, doubts, and prayers, Princess Mary gave the
Open the door, there!” he shouted. “Why have you shut it?”
stood behind the door. But just when he was clumsily creeping toward
in more wecwuits, and the sov’weign” (that was the way he referred to
down, and there’s an end of it.... What are you pushing for? Isn’t the

“That’s a miwacle.”
and feeling at that moment. “Is there anything at all behind that
lies in intellectual activity, only by a great stretch can one admit
insignificant, but when used appositely suddenly acquire a significance

the coachmen and the yard porter noticed him and raised their caps to
in chess you may think over each move as long as you please and are not
attention. He looked now at the Pratzen Heights, now at the sun floating
and similar unnatural exploits, but unobtrusively, simply, organically,
and having picked up one of the wealthiest heiresses in Russia, he grew
papers all in due form—the authorities I mean—time passed. The affair
awkward, and yet the desire to speak is there and silence seems like

but Hélène, tortured by the fact that the old count suspected her and
am sure your mother will be grateful to me. What a charming girl she is,
pensive attitude.
go? That way is nearer.”


of my fatherland.
the screen of trees was less dense. On reaching a large oak tree that
who was riding toward him.


thought she, as she went slowly along the passage.
“I knew you would be here,” replied Pierre. “I will come to supper
things packed. But of late Sónya had been particularly sad and silent.
evidently considering him too young.
inclination—practical business.
undress, drink some water, and send for the doctor.
Conversation of this kind, interesting to no one yet unavoidable,
one another, that is, leaving aside the question of the cause of the
another, dying, stepping over the dying and killing one another, only to
terrible attack of angina pectoris, but in intimate circles details
Next day Prince Andrew called at a few houses he had not visited before,

to arrange for departure of the prince, the princess, his son, and the



salt by its fiery nature it arouses a desire in the latter by means
height without the smallest effort, his ease contrasting with the heavy
room, but returned at once and dropped into an armchair in front of

“That’s Mítka, my coachman.... I have got him a good balaláyka.
dressed up in feathers and gold.

CHAPTER III
“How can I join in? Why, you’ve given a village for each of your
the standards to advance and surround the commander in chief with them.
tenderness, and glancing at Pierre she went out of the room.
to provide himself with some books for the campaign, and had spent some
before the usual term and has proposed to me to be your sponsor. I
Anatole glanced round at his sister and rose submissively, ready to
    CHAPTER III
wounded, and one knocked out,” he added, unable to restrain a happy

with her head bent first on one side and then on the other.
personal wish directed to something else. And above all,” thought Prince
the nearest commander, contrary to Napoleon’s instructions, moved them
“Ah! One of the old ones! Has your regiment had its rice?”
place in his soul. Of late he had received so many new and very serious


Prince, one would like to take Peter the Great’s old cudgel out of the



Ten men, battalions, or divisions, fighting fifteen men, battalions, or

alight in her. She was completely transformed and from a plain girl had
line of action—the one Kutúzov and the general mass of the army
of speech and of the press—and only for that reason did he obtain
good or evil but only “grand” and “not grand.” Grand is good, not
imposed upon himself as a duty, but which afterwards became a habit
great sin. How can one judge Father? But even if one might, what feeling
nothing—and he smiled joyfully as he listened to him.
“No, call her you, please! I’ll tell you all about it some other

The old princess did not reply, she was tormented by jealousy of her
“Here, eat a bit, sir,” said he, resuming his former respectful tone as
at Boguchárovo and did not wish to leave it—coming toward her with a
graceful pose under a portrait of Catherine, leaning his elbow on a
Hill perceived the throb of life in the town and felt, as it were, the
make it right” (Prince Andrew’s voice trembled and he turned away),
but the question “How?” that interested him. What the diplomatic
vicious and unfortunate people whom he would assist by word and deed,

“It’s all God’s scourge,” said Dron. “What horses we had have been

forgetting that it was unbecoming for the girls to see men undressed,
direction of the drum as formerly, but made them, on the contrary, run

moved off accompanied by an irregularly swaying sea of aides-de-camp.
sides had fallen in, another was on fire, and bright flames issued from


handsome and a terrible scapegrace. That is all I have been able to find


The dispositions drawn up by Toll were very good. As in the Austerlitz
up at all!”
words that it is a law.
They spoke of the countess’ health, of their mutual friends, of the
stirrup and did not remove his frightened blue eyes from Rostóv’s face.


says that the bee gathers pollen dust to feed the young bees and rear
prepare an asylum for them in Russia!”
my dear fellow, I’ll give you twenty thousand and a note of hand for
don’t wish to let me go, I’ll stay. But I know I am no use anywhere
toward him and said something.
illness. Prince Vasíli said something to Lorrain in passing and went
but the official who had questioned him opened the door, and Rostóv
stood beside her, kissing her hair.
Kutúzov’s whole army. To be able to crush it absolutely he awaited
scrutiny.
made use of it.... “What have I done?” thought he. And he turned

First Degree, and a dinner had been arranged for the evening, given by
Natásha had broken off her engagement. He seemed in better spirits than
have thrown off all that had been forced upon him—everything military
that the French were only some twenty-five miles away, that French
with the rank of lieutenant; but as it is I receive two hundred and
Larrey, was much more likely to end in death than in convalescence.
    CHAPTER XXV
Because they could not understand him all these people assumed that
countess had not yet come. But now steps were heard at the door, steps
if about to tell a good story he put down the cards, leaned back in his
I got up late. On waking I lay long in bed yielding to sloth. O God,
addressing her with the careless tone of habitual tenderness natural to
strategic trap at the Berëzina River. Everyone assured himself that all
face at all suited to a battlefield, but a most ordinary, homelike face.

    CHAPTER IX
some time quite uselessly.
Two officers with flushed faces, looking cheerful and happy, passed by
is the name of the ruler of all. The third name is the name unutterable

the dam, the pond, and the bank.
after their active service, were stationed near Olmütz and the camp
who lays back her ears and continues to crouch motionless before her

“Quite avare, your excellency,” suddenly shouted the colonel,
“Oh, Natásha!” she cried.
be better first to send for the military?
as it always happens in contests of cunning that a stupid person gets
and to supper.”
her in his arms. But seeing a stranger the sickly, scrofulous-looking

forces, did people begin to assure themselves that they had desired this
standing here!” Countess Mary turned pale with fright and made signs
As soon as Leppich is ready, get together a crew of reliable and
the other side of the fire, warming his thin yellow body.
“O Lord, have mercy!” added the deacon.
blame her for it at all. I know how she loves and respects you. Since
CHAPTER XVII
not leave his face.
But the attention of the crowd—officials, burghers, shopkeepers,
brigands!...”
war came contradictory news, false as usual and therefore variously
fifteen years, with the assurance of Napoleon’s invincibility, with the
30,000 went for the upkeep of the estate near Moscow, the town house,
other times. A man who simply wished to retain his lucrative post would
the figure of a bareheaded man in a peasant’s coat. He grasped a musket
so out of keeping was it with the chill darkness and closeness of the

of him and things were going from bad to worse. “For God’s sake, I
for him, she would not give way. Coldly, without looking at her son,
What am I going to do?” And he immediately gave himself the answer:
can evidently not cover the life of the peoples. And the history of the
in amazement.
control yourself,” she would reply sadly, trying to comfort her husband.
Having gone a couple of miles along the Mozháysk road, Pierre sat down
and with a deep bow would ask them to help him. The gentlemen always
“And you? Are you going to have lunch too? They feed you quite
postmaster Klyucharëv to be arrested and exiled for no particular
The first declared that the report that Count Rostopchín had forbidden

overflowed with animation and impulsiveness. To be an enthusiast had
“It’s fine, lads! Now it’s raging... It’s fine!”
to suspect.
“He writes about this war,” said the prince, with the ironic smile that

“My darling!” he said—a word he had never used to her before.
clanking his spurs, whirled rapidly round, and, striking his left heel

sooner or later he would have to re-enter that whirlpool of life, with

He moved as if to rise. The generals bowed and retired. It was past
The Emperor of Russia had, meanwhile, been in Vílna for more than a
spot chosen by Napoleon, with the guns of Pernetti and Fouché; which

“What?”
Prince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance with whoever was

shall too, if only...”
exclaimed, and immediately seizing him by the shoulder and looking

considering what impression his words would make on Natásha. He did
The first party consisted of Pfuel and his adherents—military theorists
in me—everyone must know it: Pierre, and that young girl who wanted to
“and suddenly that being is seized with pain, suffers, and ceases to
postilions, and scullions stood at the gate, staring at the wounded.
would come under his command), and Bagratión—being in command of the

a church who, availing themselves of the absence of the chief

he arrested?
being dragged along by his armpits through the garden at Bald Hills,
fresh apples, and wolf and fox skins hung about.
climbed with difficulty out of the gully.
and Nicholas’ letter to the Rostóvs, keeping the appeal, the bulletin,
serfs, a first example, of which it is very desirable that there should

been brought from Smolénsk and had since accompanied the army. Behind,
and opened the door for him.

“There, lads... oh, oh!” they mimicked the peasants, “they don’t like it
in pure, correct French many interesting details about the armies and
a small bundle of scraps from inside his shirt and gave it to the

and, with a practiced motion of three fingers, taking down another that
“For what have you come hither?” asked the newcomer, turning in
worried too about her nephew’s education for which she had always felt
Pétya so as not to let him go again, but always get him appointed to

soldier. I come home on leave and I’ll tell you how it was, I look and
aim?” said he quietly and quickly.
the gentlemen of the Tsar’s suite by his poor French.

combined with her indifference to everything about her. Her black eyes
with a look the significance of which could not be understood by mortal
loud that those in the drawing room heard her and were startled. “Why
They reached a river that had overflowed its banks and which they had to
to the big table. Not only was Pierre’s attempt to speak unsuccessful,
“Well, I don’t think you need reproach yourself on his account. All that
selfish, ascribe common sense to themselves alone.
whole army, did the same thing. The rustle of the battle of Tarútino
again glanced at Prince Andrew. As often occurs with old men, it was
(Moscou, la ville sainte), the capital of a realm such as the Scythia
Rostóv saw overhead the old familiar cornice with a bit of plaster
lay on the sofa with her face to the wall, fingering the buttons of the
The doctors were busily engaged with the wounded man the shape of whose
irritability.
Natásha, and heard for the first time the story of those last days of

to enter anyone’s head, he tried to be as cheerful as befits a good
again regained consciousness, and while drinking tea once more recalled
pleasant and comforting. Pierre did not understand what his benefactor
monarch. ‘Boyars,’ I will say to them, ‘I do not desire war, I desire
interested him, and often when sitting alone in his study he got up,
side) and transferred it to the plain between Utítsa, Semënovsk, and
on.

he accepted the role of head of the Moscow opposition. In spite of this
presented itself, unexpectedly proposed a perfectly new position
Even philanthropy did not have the desired effect. The genuine as
“But after all who asked them here? Serves them right, the bloody
how she liked our village priests and icons and would joke about them.
to Rostóv when the animal was handed over to the hussar.

feedeth them,” he said to himself and wished to say to Princess Mary;
that this mysterious force completely controlled these men and that it
high-pitched laughter from a statesman made a strange impression on him.
spent the first night in the same yard as the Rostóvs. The countess said

it then, but knew that it was not true, and I felt so uncomfortable.”
firmly.
so insistently that everyone again believed it had been necessary to do
wealthy match, and now he’s half crazy.”

State, which he had so impatiently awaited and to which he had attached
as the flight of the French was to theirs. The only difference was that
may laugh as much as you like, but all the same Bonaparte is a great


Prince Vasíli and Anatole had separate rooms assigned to them.
harnessed and packed the wagons and tied on the loads. The adjutants and
save their belongings. It was felt that everything would suddenly break
and irrepressibly, as water does in a creek. Had the Russian army been
general engagement in which he was taking part, more than that, he was
When they went into the drawing room where coffee was served, the old
and illimitable within him and that limited and material something that
desires the ruin of us all. So I write you frankly: call out the
he again came out on the road and overtook his regiment at its halting
the words of the order were not clear to the regimental commander, and
    BOOK ELEVEN: 1812
the meadow.
church; but because the bells begin to ring when the hands of the clock

wishes to stay with me, let him... he’ll be of use here if he’s a
very important.”

at his own sensibility, when Princess Mary entered. He hurriedly took a
and scarcely breathing, watched from her ambush with sparkling eyes.
mirth were in their hearts and so everything that happened was a cause
partiality dull-witted people have for any conclusion they have reached
had suffered and lacked life during his own absence, and of how she


connected with a world of eternal, solemn, and calm thoughts, quite
and complicated; and he replied to his mother in cold, formal letters
tomb of the little princess, and in this chapel was a marble monument
ring, and Zherkóv, uneasily glancing at them all, and Prince Andrew,

out of the room to change her costume. In the drawing room people began
and rejoices in life, in which like everybody else he will deceive or be
“He’ll get away!” said the esaul, screwing up his eyes.
    * “To shed (or not to shed) the blood of his peoples.”
old countess, who felt jealous and would have liked them to disagree,
sentiments,” he seemed to be saying, “so much the worse for you!”
of shots retreated. In the highest army circles from midday on the
he is one of God’s chosen, he’s a benefactor, he once gave me ten
interrupted Adráksin.
sighed. “I have loved you like a son from the first. Trust yourself to
“In that case...” began Willarski, but Pierre interrupted him.
made a tour of the regiments and was annoyed at the irregularity of
if powers till then confined within him had been liberated, and that
to be the cause of every manifestation of my life.
moment.
did that genius, Napoleon, know it, for no one issued any orders to

behind by that terror, opened and closed again.
midst of a conversation that was started about Napoleon’s Spanish
daughter, and he so prized his own cheerful tranquillity, that he

for theology, ethics, and philosophy. History surveys a presentation of
up and flew to her.
him. Pale, frightened people were doing something around the workman.
Bourienne after a pause. “I understand that you could not, and cannot,

eat?... Perhaps...”

ran:

arranging a match for her with young Rostóv. It would be a very good
work of men. Men are His tools.” She looked a little above Prince
fearing to be captured by the French on the way to Krems.
were descending. In front in the fog a shot was heard and then another,
same mind he began explaining the advantages and disadvantages of the

further commands and appointments from His Imperial Majesty.”
then chosen (she was firmly convinced she had done so) and of finding
said Natásha. “Mamma, if you’ll let me, I’ll stay!”

    CHAPTER XXVIII
Ilyín went out and Zdrzhinski rode away.


will pass here immediately; it will please him to see these gentlemen
general engagement then on the evening of the twenty-fourth, the first
burning, and pillaging, and always receives orders for these actions
too many of them are written or because in his simplicity of heart
the door she heard Nicholas clearing his throat again and stirring, and


his own mind.

should get not more than two hundred rubles every four months, even
white horse. One of the generals was reporting to him where the guns and
reality in all Napoleon’s activity we never find anything resembling an

justifications of the collective action that is performed, the less is
moment marching with the company. The hussar cornet of Kutúzov’s
Anna Pávlovna had already managed to speak to Lise about the match she
last remaining strength, took hold of his left hand with his right, and

young ever to be more to me than a friend, but this sweet friendship,
Nicholas dismounted, and with Natásha and Pétya, who had ridden up,
about him or anyone else, and I don’t want anything of the kind.”
prostrated himself before the Gates of the Temple. And really, the

Nativity of the Virgin. But there seemed to be no one to celebrate this
would sacrifice anything for you—even my feelings.”
it Likhachëv was sitting sharpening a saber for him, that the big dark
defection, ran at a trot, panting to catch up with his company. A cannon

Mávra Kuzmínichna flicked the dust off the clavichord and closed it, and
respectful form, making it impossible for him to ask wherein he was
recalled all this as childishness he had left immeasurably behind.
round it, might not be deprived of the pleasure of seeing the King of
on his companion’s face. Ramballe, with genuine distress and sympathy in
That evening, between issuing one order that the forged Russian paper
something loudly to a comrade farther back. Rostóv paused. “No,

and yard, shouting and disputing. Natásha, with the ardor characteristic
to you. Where are you traveling from?”
painful to him at this moment of sorrow; besides, what can I say to him
enter; there were no hawkers, nor the usual motley crowd of female
formed plans, the only conclusion to be drawn is that those descriptions
then coming into vogue. He laughed at theoretical treatises on estate
sweet, so good-natured, and her position now is a very hard one.”


The Russian army had to act like a whip to a running animal. And the

And with a sad and rather stern look she told Natásha all that Pierre
any single plant better suited to it than those it produces, so it is
obvious, and yet Napoleon offered and Kutúzov accepted that battle.
Stone, Moskvá, and Yaúza bridges.
a chef-d’oeuvre of tactical science which would ensure Napoleon’s
business!” and turning again to the narrator he began to laugh afresh.

tree of knowledge of good and evil.... Ah, well, it’s not for long!” he
The Emperor was in very good spirits after his ride through Vílna, where
Borís was excited by the thought of being so close to the higher powers
head fall on the window sill.
Prince Vasíli and the eldest princess were sitting close together

    CHAPTER XIX

Natásha began putting on the dress.

his thoughts, yet could not get rid of them. Suddenly, on one of the
regiment, to Timókhin and the like—people quite new to him, belonging

a retreat, also good! Why ask me?” said he. “Why, you yourselves know
I consider true love. What do you think, Prince?”

one has with these girls without their mother! I do so regret having

With the object of raising the spirits of the troops and of the people,
he had spent over an hour, and of that family circle which had received
in a dirty little room sat some ten factory hands. Tipsy and perspiring,
in Thy mercy; smite down our enemies and destroy them swiftly beneath
could not reply.
cannot regard “power” as the cause of events.
Emperor’s horse, and the faint creak of a footstep Rostóv knew at
“Where are you going?” shouted Pierre to the man, who was driving to
him down. Another valet, with his finger over the mouth of a bottle,
squadron in which Nicholas Rostóv served as a cadet was quartered in
surprise. Mention was made in Kutúzov’s report of the Russian losses,
be, I’ll tell them all to hold their tongues and will hide it from the
sharpshooters with discharged muskets, standing in the center of the
to shout: “Blackguards!... Throw the snow back on the road!” did not
perpetrated.”
running.

“Just look! See what it’s doing now. O Lord! You can even see the crows
calmed down, not taking his eyes off her for some seconds. Then his lips
“Your honor!” said he. “Be so good as to protect us! We won’t grudge
He went straight up to Prince Vasíli.
worry about that as they had an ambulance and a permanent hospital and
Sídorov, turning to the French, winked, and began to jabber meaningless
not giving him time to reply to her affectionate words. “I am very
Alexander with all their antecedents.
a smell of perfume, and put it to Nesvítski’s nose.
No, it can’t be!” Pierre kept saying as he kissed Princess Mary’s hands.
was more at ease as to the possibility of himself and his troops being
envoy. He dismounted, took Balashëv’s arm, and moving a few steps away
“Well, and so he never got farther than: ‘Sergéy Kuzmích’?”
antipathies,” thought Prince Andrew, “so it will not do to present
to abandon the road connecting him with the troops arriving from Russia,
Natásha. Why this secrecy?”

friendships? He is a man who has been more than a father to me!” The
Natásha’s voice broke. She blushed, pressed her clasped hands on her
saw—covered to the waist by a bright green quilt—the familiar,
your Denísov though he is a rake and all that, still I like him; so


his mind.
    A ces pleurs que je sens couler. *

As often happens when someone we have trusted is no longer before
laugh.

Peter I, or that the French Empire was formed and the war with Russia
termed the church of Basil the Beatified) was to have been razed to
went up to his wife, who sat with her head bent low over her embroidery
man, be for her? In her thoughts of marriage Princess Mary dreamed of
papers sent off in due form. The place was a long way off, and while
and his presence there, Natásha had resolved to see him. She did not
safety, Daniel set his chestnut galloping, not at the wolf but straight
moment at the ambulance station when he had seen Kurágin, he could not
in front of the position where the battle was accepted. Why was it
of joy in his eyes, looked round him, not knowing how to answer the
a servant. From there they passed into another room. A man in strange
At that time, as always happens, the highest society that met at court
might have been funny, but it lacked just that something which is the
guest of honor and hero of the Austrian campaign, Prince Bagratión, to
since gained him the reputation of being a wizard, and that the power of
More than anyone else, Prince Vasíli took possession of Pierre’s
greatness.

Bald Hills with sixteen horses and dozens of servants and stayed for
What is life, and what is death? What power governs all?”
shoulders and eyes, almost closing the latter, sighed, and moved away
His troops were the same, his generals the same, the same preparations
accompanied by General Bennigsen and Marquis Paulucci, had gone a second

imploringly at her, evidently afraid that she might not understand.
“Let us understand one another, Countess,” said he with a smile, and
“Don’t fire.... Wait!” he shouted.
Kutúzov bowed with the same smile.

given him by the commander in chief and his fellow officers, Prince



to sleep, but he knew he would not be able to and that most depressing
wild virgin pine forest, and far away on the other side of the Enns the
to their camps, and the householders seized all they could find in other
that had been so humiliating in her morning’s visit.
Hundreds of peasants, among them the Boguchárovo folk, suddenly began
Finally, the latest episode in Poland still fresh in the captain’s

    * A masterly woman.



that I am serving Barclay. I confess I do not want to.”
men such as I had never seen before, that we had held the French for
forward beside Schmidt with the bullets merrily whistling all around,
dew-besprinkled dust of the road, on the walls of the houses, on the
Either to assume (1) that the will of the people is always

to think, as he listened to Zdrzhinski. But he did not express his

“And yet what a splendid reign your master might have had!”
“Yes, they have. Julie Drubetskáya told me so. I went to see them, but
part of his legs; he had on a kind of necklace above which rose a high
and that if a letter reached the Grand Duke in command of the Guards
wavering clouds of smoke rose over the Square.
Prince Andrew without joining in the conversation watched every movement
obedient, and insignificant atom. They followed Prince Dolgorúkov out
“Oh, master, master, what a sin! And you who have a son!” she began,
putting the whole column on the alert, so he sent Tíkhon Shcherbáty, a
Emperor’s speech had been extraordinary. It had been a speech such as

     * Our most gracious sovereign.
his horse indolently and carelessly. Rostóv recalled their quarrel of
“Not unto us, not unto us, but unto Thy Name!... I too am a man like the

preparing something for them and concealing it.
“Oh nothing, only a trifle,” said Natásha, smiling still more brightly.
“Then it is not true that he’s married!”
his face, went up to Pierre and bent over him.
welfare and civilization of humanity in general, by which is usually
shattered was once more stirring in his soul with a new beauty and on
and unoccupied where, they thought, yet greater riches might be found.
line (the Guards) was already in action.

of the news.
was calm, though a severe and grave expression had again settled on her

he consoled himself. “And besides, what have I done to bring it about?
inconveniencing him by being too exacting. She acted in contradiction
or even two pieces with pleasure. For we feel how it is; but what’s all
come back for her.”
at her heart. She could not assume that pose, which would have made her
had. Yet in spite of this your vow was binding. You swerved from it.
footmen, and awaited each expected dish with some anxiety. Everything
melody that unexpectedly came to his mind seemed to him particularly
whole time of his service Dron had never been drunk or ill, never after

youthful movement, stood for a moment in the stirrup as if loathe to
the matter?” made Natásha approach more swiftly to what was lying in the
him. He tried to say something, but his face suddenly puckered and

he reflected, “there is no riding round it now. I must look for the
born, and so on. Then he was again led somewhere still blindfolded,

to him by the officers, and, like a man desperately insisting on having
Though it was not clear what the artist meant to express by depicting
question.


no one else drew them into the social life of the household as he did.
once, as a clock begins to strike and chime as soon as the minute hand
with wide-open eyes. He had awaked from a terrible dream. He had dreamed
“Yes, sir.”
merely from the attitude of the court. He saw on the one hand that the
Next day the old count called his son aside and, with an embarrassed
that the convoy had fifteen hundred men. Denísov had two hundred, and

“I burned this to prove my love for her. I just heated a ruler in the
“Ah, here she is!” he exclaimed laughing. “My pet, whose name day
to agree to run away with him, was something Pierre could not conceive


a peg on which to hang the prince’s favorite topic, he looked
“No, ah... Likhachëv—isn’t that your name? Do you know I have only just
she had learned it) she talked with her partner, fanning herself and
cautious movements of those who crowded round the invalid chair that

“My dear friend?” said she, in a tone of pathetic inquiry, prepared
easy.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
After receiving her visitors, the countess was so tired that she gave
The tall youth, not noticing the disappearance of his foe, waved his

but tried to guess what he was saying and inquiringly repeated the words
thought he heard a strange noise through the door. He was seized with

at Yankóvo. Rostóv was just mounting to go for a ride round the
They seemed not to have expected him to talk like anybody else, and the
only thoughts. Something was lacking in them, they were not clear, they
bosom as it rose and fell.
prince.

and cut up by rough-shod hoofs, the marks of which were visible in the
expected was approaching. Hardly anyone he knew was left in town. Julie
Nicholas was to go with him to the regiment; then came Anna Mikháylovna

about him and even speak.
arm above the elbow—as from the shock to his horse and from fright.
“Well, Mamma? Everything is ready. What’s the matter?” asked Natásha, as
be kissed, and again Prince Andrew noticed tears in the old man’s eyes.

And as often happens with old people, Kutúzov began looking about
things, but Austria never has wished, and does not wish, for war. She
the staff captain in his deep bass, calmly stroking his long mustache.
Petersburg he inquired for Kurágin but the latter had already left the
Denísov in a felt cloak and a sheepskin cap from which the rain ran down
Pétya.

whether her engagement to Borís was a jest or an important, binding

Vyázma and Tarútino.
Only by watching closely moment by moment the movement of that flow and
rescue the tall lad only increased the fury of the crowd. It was a long
with his hand on the saddle, the Emperor turned to the cavalry general

“Yes,” replied Prince Andrew, “but with this little difference, that
forever and there came into being something nondescript, neither
annoyance. “Good luck to you!”
heart rejoices to know that you... You have suffered so much.... But, my
She paused. She so wanted a word from him that would explain to her what

thirty years, and understanding the mood he was in expected a pleasant
They all knew very well that the enchanting countess’ illness arose from
as soon as all is over,” and Prince Vasíli sighed to intimate what he
     * (2) That their fire gets into his eyes and he forgets that
to his estates and quite recovered the philanthropic mood in which
lifted his head high and gazed at Denísov as if repressing a laugh.
kindness,” or, “With your excellent heart,” “You are yourself so
“Well, then go off to your Buonaparte! Mademoiselle Bourienne,
indicating the Rostóvs’ box. On seeing Natásha Pierre grew animated
words. She was listening to the ceaseless moaning of the adjutant, three

boots—and wearing a star Rostóv did not know (it was that of the
in the street. A shopman who entered told her that her husband had
from the height of this perception all that had previously tormented and
Prince Andrew made use of Boguchárovo, began building and spent most of
“Je vous aime!” * he said, remembering what has to be said at such

exaggerated grasseyement, “the prince has been scolding Michael
princess’ hand.
Through the cross streets of the Khamóvniki quarter the prisoners
sacrifice everything.
From all sides were heard the footsteps and talk of the infantry, who
“How am I? If we grumble at sickness, God won’t grant us death,” replied

for your work. And lastly you too, peasants, come from the forests where
horses and Ilyá Iványch. I don’t think Ilyá drives anyone except
Evidently the prince understood her, and also understood, as he had done
to the Austrian Emperor and smiled.
here, is he not? Please announce me.”
“Forever?” said Prince Andrew. “Nothing’s forever.”
The Frenchman expanded his chest and made a majestic gesture with his

left alone.
“That’s not right! That’s not right!” cried the prince, and himself
the affair had come to an actual duel). “You know, Count, it is much
and began to speak. A throng of officers surrounded him. He looked


discuss my actions, but to give you advice—or an order if you prefer it.

remember how we and Nicholas, all three of us, talked in the sitting
by the disorderly movement of the Russian columns, and from all
Túshin’s battery but had never reached it. Interrupting one


colonel of hussars who, growing more and more flushed, ate and drank so
“Papa, we shall be late,” said Princess Hélène, turning her
shoulders looked thin and her bosom undeveloped. But Hélène seemed, as
“How pleasant it is, your excellency!” he said with a respectful
The Emperor began to breathe heavily and rapidly, his lower lip
consider everyone his friend. It seemed to him that he was surrounded
It comforted her to reflect that she was not better as she had formerly
along the road and field leading to the Otrádnoe covert.
possibility of anyone seeing her without being enchanted. The aunt
hand, lay Prince Andrew Bolkónski bleeding profusely and unconsciously
hand she went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead.
and participating in the work of the legislative commission, could give
that. Paper money may deceive the ignorant, but nobody is deceived by
history begins—that theory explains nothing.

“I see, Colonel, from all that is happening, that Providence requires
streets of Brünn and found himself surrounded by high buildings, the
    CHAPTER XXXI
indicated that if he was not dancing it was because he would not and not
Lise? Take her to your room and I’ll go to Father. How is he? Just the
The plight of the whole army resembled that of a wounded animal which
I have business....”
well as anybody,” he said, and advanced with a single division.
ironic smile:
Andrew. Prince Andrew seemed, and really was, quite a different, quite

asked Weyrother several times to repeat words he had not clearly heard
soothe him.

speak of it. Natásha shared this as she did all his feelings, which she
Minister of This and B Governor General of That, and that the Emperor
imprisonment, now again controlled his existence. It was terrible, but
task Pierre had to face was one for which he had very little aptitude or
formed into detachments and began firing. Orlóv-Denísov, still waiting
voice; above all he had never seen such delicate whiteness of face or
continually sought to find—the aim of life—no longer existed for
Rostopchíne, * the Russians to the barbarity of the French. In reality,
jest was unacceptable and had not come off. He grew confused.

himself, but only desires the good of mankind. And what have they
you want to know whether I am happy? No! Is she happy? No! But why this


words:

from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by two footmen, who
paper arrived and they began to look for the old man. ‘Where is the old
only because we have to seek our bread in the sweat of our brows, but

same conditions and with the same character he will do the same thing as
and he described women so alluringly that Pierre listened to him with
“Lord God of might, God of our salvation!” began the priest in that
comrade Berg’s best wishes for success, rode to Olmütz to see
“Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte,” said Anna Pávlovna,
dared complain, I who am deprived of all who are dear to me? Ah, if

“How kind they all are,” thought Pierre. “What is surprising is that
animal went when excited. Bending his foaming muzzle to his chest, his

the bonfires of our infantry who were felling wood. The French line was
Vasíli one day, closing his eyes and fingering Pierre’s elbow,
also small scratch groups of foot and horse, and groups of peasants and
Kutúzov writes...” and he screamed as piercingly as if he wished to

Freemason,” she went on, indicating Pierre. “Put him beside his wife
he will hit me in the head, or elbow, or knee. Can’t I go away from

cannot, cannot live, because...”
Mikháylovna, whom she had not seen properly since she returned from
pleasurable and exhilarating effect on Rostóv than the previous sounds

“But she doesn’t like me,” said Natásha.
had then said.



dressers.
by the living mass of moving infantry, Váska Denísov, red and shaggy,

remaining strength. He raised his pistol and aimed.

wine with dignity and looking to the count for approval.
roar of many voices shouting “Hurrah!” to the new commander in chief.
hand. “How did you get here?” said he, turning to Zherkóv.
shoes mistrustfully, as at an alien. Not far from him walked a fat major
Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew’s study like
She now saw him from the commencement of that scene and relived what she
“At what o’clock was General Schmidt killed?”
and Pierre especially, for he reminded him of all the painful moments of
without support. Prince Bagratión turned to the officer and with his

daughter!”

She could not have read the letter as she did not even know it had
house. Having repeated her order to Dron to have horses ready for her
to buy back Otrádnoe—that being his pet dream.
the portionless Sónya. Though she blamed herself for it, she could
Kutúzov’s merit lay, not in any strategic maneuver of genius, as it is
And there in the coffin was the same face, though with closed eyes.
In the morning, on an empty stomach, all the old questions appeared as

the bearer of the letter.

tried to remain tranquil, she knew that she would be unable to look at
voice, smile, and glance. She wrote to him formal, monotonous, and dry
habits, passions, and impulses toward goodness, beauty, and truth—that
an organ in it on which some rugs were piled, and in one corner stood

followed them unnoticed by his uncle and sat down at the writing table
Mary, of the theater, and of Kurágin mingled with her thoughts. The
at Alpátych from the back of the crowd.
But the officer thrashed him because he had to get on as quickly as
regiment, but the whole brigade—gave Rostóv a dinner to which the

the priests and deacons and some servants also went in at the door.

refined French in which our grandfathers not only spoke but thought, and
natural and agreeable for them to think that the activity of their class


addressing Lorrain in French which he pronounced badly.
behind him.
he had looked over the heads of the men around him, when he should have
self-satisfied, youthful, and constant smile of animation, and by the
Prince Andrew looked at him and without replying went on speaking to
but only by the pleasure that just perceptibly lit up her whole face.
him.”


supposing Natásha to be asleep.

historians (to the effect that Kutúzov hindered an attack) is unfounded,
He looked about him absently. Thousands of eyes were looking at him from
After dinner Natásha went to her room and again took up Princess
a certain house—that was another matter and quite the thing for a
martyr’s death for his sake. Then Robespierre was beheaded for being
circles where the future, on which the fate of millions depended, was
grief and by her own personal feelings which she shared with no one.
Ever since that leave of absence had expired, more than a fortnight
“Ah, Wostóv? How are you, how are you?” he called out, still in the
tomorrow!”
lope farther to the left to the very place where they were standing.
word) in the officer’s voice, in the expression of his face and in
had evidently been drinking.

stern face, but seeing, that Natásha’s head was covered, she smiled
correct.


you’ll give her the packet?”
passage leading to the rooms on the ground floor. The count’s face was

was coming, and turning to her mother:
to place under an assumed name, doing no one any harm but praying for
have been as good as Weyrother’s, but for the disadvantage that
an aim had been simply a search for God, and suddenly in his captivity
hands, he looked more closely at the ring, with its skull—a Masonic
All dissensions are at an end! I am so glad, so delighted! At last
was silent and then from the study the sound was heard of other steps,
self-complacent happiness that one sees on the face of a boy happily
“That depends on our luck in starting, else why shouldn’t we be


“Sónya! Sónya!” he again heard the first speaker. “Oh, how can

the chief author of the plan of campaign; Paulucci, an adjutant general
said Natásha.
look at Pierre.

“Just as I may suppose you to be deluded,” said Pierre, with a faint

man.” Again he pressed the hand of the latter with an expression of
smile.
than Nicholas had ever seen her before.
from the Guards just before this campaign. He behaved very well in the
adventure at Boguchárovo, rallied him on having gone to look for hay
At first the noise of the falling bombs and shells only aroused
and embarrassed, but sat on because he simply could not get up and take


All were silent.
and services to be again performed in the churches.
of feet be heard.
like all those Polish names.”
This being the field marshal’s frame of mind he was naturally regarded
speaker, interrupted him. Evidently accustomed to managing debates and

cannonade was dying down, but the rattle of musketry behind and on the

“Once again, Colonel,” said the general, “I can’t leave half
“Spies, traitors, traitors everywhere! Not a moment’s peace in my


yourself forward anywhere.”
a partner, and the old men began smilingly to talk about Poland and the
“What are you writing, Mary?” Nicholas asked.
Moscow who was expected every moment, and men on horseback with lanterns
directed his will to the fulfillment of the divine ends, and that reply
“As it flies past me, Daddy, the ball I mean,” said a young soldier
the reason why the life and activity of people who lived centuries ago
regimental commander hung his head, silently shrugged his shoulders, and
He was sent for trial and condemned to hard labor, I believe. Now the
out of harmony with the general mood. They all seemed very gay.
pressed him still harder with proofs of the impossibility and above all
hoarse, feeble voice.
into those southern provinces (for the Russian army did not bar his
and who did not know Russian, yet felt deeply moved (as he wrote) when
doubted but felt almost certain that without the help of troops the

executions resulting from the preaching of love.

efforts had been expended. He knew that it was a lost battle and that
CHAPTER IX
that strength of mind which he thought constituted his merit and his
other hounds joined in, now pausing and now again giving tongue. A
“Was it not fate that brought him to Boguchárovo, and at that very
unhappy her father would be if Andrew left without being reconciled to
and don’t forget to give him the Rostóvs’ invitation. They ask him
all be killed,” a sergeant was saying angrily and reproachfully.
It was nearly three o’clock but no one was yet asleep, when the

Kutúzov was in Górki, near the center of the Russian position. The
into a tragic spectacle that remained in every memory, and on the
adorning his speech with terms of endearment and with folk sayings which
animated by the same desire.

me in the eyes of society, and even of the court,” he added, lowering

said he.
go to Moscow. But the countess’ health obliged them to delay their
little effort.”
“Malbrook s’en va-t-en guerre. Dieu sait quand reviendra.” *
empty witticisms. Gradually, unnoticed, all these persons began to
“Nothing! What business is it of yours?” muttered the count angrily.
choice has fallen. I don’t know what you will think of it, but
“Now what does this mean, gentlemen?” said the staff officer, in
I have done that though badly and to a small extent; but I have done
marriage ceremony over them. At Kámenka a relay of horses was to wait
to question him, and immediately after the elder had given a few replies

covered the lower part of his face, and a tangle of hair, infested
the most striking and definite examples is an army.

Only the eldest princess, the one with the stony face and long waist,
Cossacks and hussars who had rigged up rough shelters in the glade and
that’s all there is in what is called heroism! And did I do it for my
her? She is an angelic being! Ah, Borís, Borís!”—she paused.

saying,” said some of the mob pointing to the tall youth.
Morel, a short sturdy Frenchman with inflamed and streaming eyes, was
stables before dinner. Having taken precautions against the general
melancholy was just like the august melancholy she showed at the mention
were casual guests—chiefly young men, among whom were Denísov,
the many horses, grew so confused that it leaped along the road in front
reply to which all the rest will be incomprehensible—is: what is the
and angry resolution that caused Márya Dmítrievna to look at her more
cry. Prince Andrew evidently felt ill at ease, but to the two women
their age.
in the vestibule and tried to take the pistol from him. Pierre, coming
Russian troops were crossing the river Enns. At midday the Russian
commander in chief and of his own luggage. Very sinister reports of the
“Oh, he’s a hard nut to crack,” said one of the officers who was sitting
Drawn on by the movement of his troops Napoleon rode with them as far as
“Mamma!” rang out the clear contralto notes of her childish voice,
When, waking in a cold perspiration, he moved on the divan, Natásha went
black eyes gazed from under his brows at his master, who was silent.
The little princess, taking the dress from the maid, came up to Princess
special strength, but now we need much more powerful methods. It is
to Rostóv, rode up to Napoleon in an orderly’s jacket and on a French
Meanwhile Prince Vasíli had opened the door into the princess’ room.
Andrew came up, stroked her hair, and asked if she felt rested after
Natásha began in a mild voice such as children use when they wish to be
serfs. “So in your parts, too, the harvest is nothing to boast of,

He had often before, during the last six weeks, remained alone with her,


with France, a rupture which, according to them, ought to be promptly
conquerors caused the wars and that it is possible to find the laws of
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
by six horses at a smart trot. Behind the calèche galloped the suite
our failures were due to a want of unity in the command and though the

sight of tears and was ready to cry himself.

written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the
he had learned how to manage his thoughts when in danger. He had grown


Revolution, general progress, or anything else—then it is impossible
that was it was not that which tormented Pierre at the moment. He was
and a fear and anxiety of which she did not understand the cause. She

Moscow is not the loss of Russia. In reply to Lauriston’s proposal of

Pierre did not come either and Natásha, not knowing that Prince Andrew

hoped. She prayed for her brother as living and was always awaiting news
meeting immediately struck Rostóv as a romantic event. “A helpless girl
in a certain position the day before, by the third day when something

pretext Belóva’s deafness.
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work

King of Prussia what he is to do if he is summoned to surrender.... All
Natásha was listening and considering.
and yet loved him. I experienced that feeling of love which is the very
Hélène Bezúkhova’s reputation as a lovely and clever woman became
with banks still bare of grass. It was at the end of a village that
drought had continued for more than three weeks. Each day fleecy clouds
Balashëv and with a slight smile, as confidently, quickly, and simply
(if they do not express it, that is merely because traders and soldiers
surrounding the battery and gazed at what was going on around him with
Natásha, seeing the impression the news of her brother’s wound
“Yes, it’s all very well for you. You are pleased, you’ve had a good
raised to the highest pitch.

It was no longer, as before, a dark, unseen river flowing through the
danger—are surrounded by the French. It would be dangerous to move now.


“How can one talk or think of such trifles?” thought Pierre.

you!”
could be heard above the three hundred others. He nearly wept. “To the
“No, I have a wicked heart.”
comprehend, so each individual has within himself his own aims and yet
order of Maria Theresa on his neck and a black bandage round his head,
“No, I’ve come on my own,” answered Pierre, and he went down the hill
“Do you know, you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs,”
only the whites were seen, and on his bare legs and arms which were

added.
The Englishman took out his purse and began counting out the money.

allowed to go on so and that it is the duty of all decent men to
shots came.

Rostóvs, and the party became unquestionably exactly like all other
of antiquity had been performed by General Raévski. He recounted how

cheerful, self-assured old man; now he seemed a pitiful, bewildered
wife came up with a look of disapproval.
Andrew asked himself with instinctive curiosity.

the officers and men of Denísov’s squadron, though they tried to talk
confirm this supposition—then she told herself that only she, with her
“Don’t speak to me... I beg you,” muttered Pierre hoarsely.
long been watching all that was going on, carefully covering his bare
“I have come with my mother to see the count, but it seems he is not
which can only cause harm.”
the hussars.”
By evening, the adjutants had spread it to all ends and parts of the
“Yes... I will tell him,” answered Pierre; “but...”

diplomatic discretion tormented him, and he was happy to have in Prince



“It’s because Papa wanted to give up all the carts to the wounded,” said
Hélène returned with Natásha to the drawing room. The Rostóvs went
and still thought of them, and other matters that interested no one and
cardplayer, and who, also transformed by his uniform, came up to Pierre,

the French drummer boy. “A prisoner? You’ve already been in action? May
long time past. She felt that something had happened to him, but he said
Moscow, there would be fighting at the town gates, arms were being
went with her into the unoccupied room.
even-tempered and calm and quite as cheerful as of old. This amazed
of which it attracts mercury, seizes it, holds it, and in combination
ribbons.
of men and women known for the freedom of their conduct. Mademoiselle


tools; and, as they say, one needs a tool even to kill a louse,” said
“Yes, they worked all day and didn’t play!” remarked the tall,
under any pretense. (3) Sunday and Wednesday of each week are appointed
Sónya, with a quiver in her voice due chiefly to the attention that was
her own way, and after that nursed all her babies herself.
entered her box began talking to him with an amiable smile.


orders—as the historians tell us—to retreat by the Smolénsk road.
badness of the road from Petersburg to Moscow and of his Petersburg
me?”
whether telling a story or giving an opinion the speaker always stopped,
where the rivals suddenly recognized one another; and the ladies looked


I can do.” And his fancy pictured the battle, its loss, the

their grief in their own way. The old prince would not cherish any hope:
part of the hive and peers in. Instead of black, glossy bees—tamed by


the Emperor for having moved his army along the Ryazán road, and the
that they were not attending on him (he was no longer there, he had left
standing on the highest possible pinnacle of human power with the

before—she felt a need of being angry and would choose as the handiest
him, was kneeling before him. He realized that it was the real living

    CHAPTER XV
On seeing the Russian general he threw back his head, with its long hair
the honors of the district, but was in reality a good general, useful
dismissed from here; therefore, you can stay and go with us wherever our
how do you judge of it?” he added, addressing Nicholas, who when he
of raisins. “Have some, gentlemen, have some!”
regiment, or in general of that other free life which was going on


goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will remain
“Yes, one is afraid,” continued the first speaker, he of the
apartments assigned to Prince Vasíli.
To her impatience and pining for him were now added the unpleasant
is the principal aim of these three? Certainly self-reformation and

“But if the bridge is crossed it means that the army too is lost? It
The princess pondered awhile with a thoughtful smile and her luminous

of her drooping face. She moved, and the ball rolled off her knees. She


this peasant, it was reported to him that Tíkhon had attached himself


“No, Mamma, I will lie down here on the floor,” Natásha replied
influence of advisers and other people introduced by the universal
agitated by the encounter to be able to talk of the affair calmly. In

prepare her sister-in-law, and every time began to cry. Unobservant as
Prince Bagratión proposed to Dolgorúkov to send to inquire of the

understanding the folly of the rest of mankind and the reasonableness

on his face now.
battle would still not take place. It would not take place because the
and besides this, nine men in every thousand for the militia. Everywhere
“See where we’ve met again!” said the little man. “Túshin,
land to have the strength to move.


pointed to the assistant), “keep on here. Some five of us doctors have
you. Can I do anything for you? Dispose of me. It is for life and death.

goal, its impetus ever increasing as it neared its aim, just as the
subsequently termed “that gosling I have made an eagle”).
    CHAPTER XIII
When the review was over, the newly arrived officers, and also
hospital at Ostrolenka till I recover. In regard to which I humbly
matter plainly and simply, and we will not abandon that right.

“I’ve been sent back to the regiment all on account of that devil,


realized that something dreadful had happened to his regiment, and the


as paper, clean, and not as much smell as a puff of powder smoke.’”
“Go, my dear fellow,” he said to Ermólov, “and see whether something
time are wanted. Kámenski sent soldiers to Rustchuk, but I only employed
bells, and of the wind. History must do the same. And attempts in this
not see or understand Him and may not see or understand his own vileness

time.
on the third they placed Prince Andrew. For a little while he was left
pretext. The fact is he has come to see Count Cyril Vladímirovich,
is how I explain it to myself. It can’t be helped!”
for everything, the colonel moved forward and ordered the second
smoke, and an officer catching sight of Bagratión rushed shouting after
you?” he asked.
impressed Alpátych, but in thinking about his own business he soon
long before and had already observed the French closely considered
of our error in this matter is due to the fact that in the historical

drooping head and breathing heavily, pacing silently up and down. When
Prince Andrew went up to Pierre, and the latter noticed a new and
“Here, take the child!” said Pierre peremptorily and hurriedly to the
liveliness he began chaffing Pierre about the need to be very careful


     Moscow! Here it is then at last, that famous city. It was
the Rostóvs’ visit.
When Prince Vasíli returned to the drawing room, the princess, his
Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who from
it. But at that moment an adjutant galloped up with a message from the

and impossible, he again glanced timidly at her. She did not sit down
“Hm.... If you wish to kill him, to kill him outright, you can see

had not exasperated the vicomte, and had convinced herself that it was
indeed get somewhere, though not to their right places; a few eventually

Street, talking. A third officer galloped up to them.
And now there’s Dólokhov sitting in the snow with a forced smile and
everyone knew of the imperial dissatisfaction with him. The proprieties
still you are at home while they—you see what they have come to,” said
abandoning his companions. The others who could do so drove away too,
me about yourself.”
none, but looked so unhappily and greedily at the others while they were
find what it should do at that most difficult moment. And as soon as the
the last post station but one before Moscow, Denísov had drunk three
and both halves of the door noiselessly opened. It entered, and it was
Prince? How priceless are those last moments! It can make things no
(which he very likely would be), and found the commander in chief
too are the forces.
Three weeks after the last evening he had spent with the Rostóvs,
universe, in the whole universe there is a kingdom of truth, and we who
beaten, that the enemy was flying and must be driven out; but at the
Rostóv learned later that Russian and Austrian soldiers had been firing
his speech, which he used in extreme cases when special persuasion was
so long,” he added.
Dron on the day of the prince’s funeral and told him to have twelve

When he heard these words and saw the expression of firm resolution in

Princess Mary was first surprised and then aghast at this question.
occupied not with what was before his eyes but with something special
“One can’t everywhere say all one thinks, mon cher. Well, have
composing an army, quite independently of whether they are, or are not,
not disfigured by the approach of death. It was the same as Pierre
the evening at Count Kochubéy’s. He told the count of his interview
forces, but will always be a mean—what in mechanics is represented by
that imprint of newness found in the households of the newly married.
What does all this mean? Why did it happen? What made those people burn
came among a huge and closely packed train of artillery mingled with
ill and did not leave his study.
wait. For instance, on the twenty-eighth it is suggested to him to
him with the whole expression of her face, radiant with gratitude and
Anísya Fëdorovna entered. On the tray was a bottle of herb wine,
Pierre knew so well in his wife, revolted him.
a bird in his hands and flies away. And there’s no way of killing him
opposite room.
to leave that seclusion where they three were shut off from all the
“Ah, Nicholas, do you know I am often troubled about little Nicholas,”
CHAPTER XIX
of Prince Gruzínski’s house on the other, Pierre suddenly heard the


her long teeth.

Nicholas, when he had come to tell her that her brother was with the


something with her slender nervous fingers and gazing intently and

actual historic event such as the campaign of 1812 for instance, they
“Look at the stars. It’s wonderful how they shine! You would think the



looking at Pierre. “At the present time it is difficult to know the
Buxhöwden is commander in chief by seniority, but General Bennigsen

The Cossack bent forward from under the wagon to get a closer look at

sleigh; Dimmler, his wife, and Pétya, into the old count’s, and the
It was just then that he received a letter from his wife, who implored
blushing—“of asking the commander in chief. He has had a letter from
the Rostóvs.

Kremlin.
“Yes, I had forgotten... I really must go home... business...” said
dinner.
But we need only penetrate to the essence of any historic event—which
who was reduced to the ranks, took a French officer prisoner in my
evidently would not repay.
“No, on my word it’s not obstinacy! I can’t describe the feeling.
When Princess Mary began to cry, he understood that she was crying at

who was passing:
branches of trees heavy with hoarfrost.
ashamed; he felt that he was occupying someone else’s place here
Sónya. “Why doesn’t he openly ask for your hand? You know Prince

its teeth, with equal ease picking fleas out of its fur or crunching

A French corporal, with coat unbuttoned in a homely way, a skullcap on
to do with Sergéy Kuzmích—a smile of bashfulness at their own
“My dear count, you were one of my best pupils—you must dance,”
valued his success in the service, to be at Tilsit on the occasion of
piercing cries.
the old count came in and welcomed the princess. He had changed very

words can be the immediate cause of the movements of millions of men.
the efforts of the old count, and instead of being degraded to the ranks
Pierre, was only busy causing him annoyance.
this very day,” he murmured to himself.
“Scoundrels! Blackguards!” shrieked the old man, turning his face
with them.
young man. He sat with his legs up on the sofa as if quite at home and,
and villages on Russian soil beginning with Smolénsk, without the
joyful and agitating thoughts began to occupy his mind. Recalling the
as he called it. Twice during his career Kutúzov had been governor of



“Where? I send them away and take a weceipt for them,” shouted Denísov,
the crowned heads of Europe. The discredited rulers of the world can
felt it indecorous to speak of her pregnancy before Pierre, though the

to remorse troubled her when she thought of her visit. Though she had
     And mingle a secret sweetness
any moment.)
up a glass and a pipe that were handed him.
my sovereign pleases, but I cannot work with the Minister (meaning

leaving Orël, to induce the Italian officer to accept some money of
of some force commensurate with the whole movement of the peoples.

which aroused his own pity.

vision. Now that she knew that the renewal of Natásha’s relations with

would set all Russia against you and everyone of us would feel ashamed
night when he had decided that to marry Hélène would be a calamity and
you have seen him.”

in the best possible manner, and feeling that he was doing it well he
Then she slipped down among the flowerpots on the other side of the tubs
“Because when once a man starts on military service, he should try to

“Yes, gentlemen, I’ve been told there’s a rumor going about Moscow
Madame de Staël, and others spoke certain words to one another only
“Really, madam, it is not at all too long,” said Mávra, crawling on
He took the pistol in his hand and began asking about the working of the
forgets either an insult or a service. I offer you my friendship. That
it necessary to hold his head higher, to brace himself, and to question
“Allow me to give you a piece of advice. When you reach the capital,
higher to Natásha and said, with a pleasant smile, that the young
light and long dark shadows. The forest at the farthest extremity of
“O Lord God! Thou who art in that heaven, save, forgive, and protect
him not in the least abashed.
Mítenka so much, and was so good-natured, that everybody took advantage
burglaries, incendiarisms, and murders as in whole centuries are not

meaning what Pierre himself had in mind, namely: “If you want to eat

history’s essential question: what is power? The universal historians

“You see, my dear fellow, I have been thinking about you,”
campfires to the other side of the road where he had been told the
the count went with the prospective purchaser to his estate near Moscow.
necessity to which he is subject cannot be solved by comparative


him, and of course I am glad of it. He is a fine lad, a fine lad! This
After her visit to the Rostóvs and her unexpectedly chilly reception by
interview with Napoleon in Danzig, when his august brother-in-law had



Iogel’s were the most enjoyable balls in Moscow. So said the mothers
At the end of the week the prince reappeared and resumed his former way

an explanation with him about Natásha.
know for certain how much Véra would have and did not receive at least
begin talking about him in the presence of that Frenchwoman,” thought
CHAPTER XV
attend, for what he was saying did not interest her at all. She looked
put down the guitar, and went to the drawing room.
rulers of France turns to his advantage. His attempts to avoid his
Bennigsen nor the Emperor was there, but Chernýshev, the Emperor’s
He sat awhile in the hut joyfully recalling the details of his


by the guns shouted some words of command to the officer, and the latter

when I say ‘three’... You stand here, and you in my arms—well now! One,
an ambush, that they should not be seen and might be able to strike an


across the field. The borzois bore down on it.... Now they drew close

window, with a thin, pale, and spiteful face. She glanced round at him,
and whom Borís addressed turned round crossly and told him Bolkónski
bewildered him with fine words, and he is so flattered by his rapidly
infringement of the real power; or (2) that the will of the people
the battle at Austerlitz? The French losses were almost equal to ours,
August. All was destroyed, except something intangible yet powerful and
maid with the decanter in her haste had not closed the door (everything
“Devil take all these peasants, and money matters, and carryings

Pétya paced the room in silence for a time.
it would have been difficult for a face to express greater respect and
Natásha as one looks at a wall. Borís passed them twice and each time
has completed a full circle, this change was shown by an increased

countess.
without delay and carry out instructions!

and was going to tuck up the other trouser leg to save this stranger the
not sleep.
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.


    * “That girl shall be my wife.”
the attempted abduction of Rostóva. He resolutely denied these
straps, and these changed their familiar faces.
with animated face she ran into the room.
wounded man.
one after another to her memory. With mournful pleasure she now lingered
and came out to the porch in his lilac silk dressing gown. In the yard
Austrian Council of War at which Suvórov crowed like a cock in reply to
Rostóv, in dismay, began justifying himself, but seeing the kindly,
in November, 1805, announcing that he and his son would be paying him

him and Hélène. “Well, what of it, if you all know it?” thought
himself) “has shown or displayed in the battle of the twenty-sixth—there
unconditionally transferred to the ruler or rulers they have chosen, and
down into a gully just in front of them.
CHAPTER IV
not interrupt him or laugh at what he said.
revelation.
dwell arose in his soul.



trigger, as he had not before held a pistol in his hand—a fact that he
being only two miles off the Smolénsk highroad. During the last three
face with its fine straight nose would have been handsome had it not
felt for both of them.
pausing. “The only question is what will come of the meeting between
room, they still heard the laughter and merry voices trying to persuade
CHAPTER VIII
wrote about Gerákov: ‘Lectures for the corps inditing’... Recite them,

all right my staying a day with you?” And not waiting for a reply he
everything depend on her daughter’s inclination. She invited Nicholas
motherly tenderness and pity for the unknown young officer.
His illness pursued its normal physical course, but what Natásha
fifty-three minutes. He noted this down that same evening, among other

Her favorite sonata bore her into a most intimately poetic world and
Examining only those expressions of the will of historical persons
from childhood. He has a heart of gold. I beg you, Natalie,” Prince
Emperor’s will had decided on the abandonment of Moscow, now realized at
“If it were hot,” Prince Andrew would reply at such times very dryly

The spirit of an army is the factor which multiplied by the mass gives

met him at the first door and, expressing their delight at seeing such a
“No, I have been looking at you a long time. I felt you come in. No one


Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
besides all this something creaked, there was a whiff of fresh air, and
“Mais, mon cher, I did this for my own sake, to satisfy my conscience,
“Natásha, what is it about?” she asked. “What do they matter to
The lieutenant never looked the man he was speaking to straight in the
recalled that impulse to unsolicited and inexplicable frankness which
what Pierre had told them. Princess Mary did not express her opinion of


dressed into the ballroom to await her father, and looking in the large
be seen.
nonsense; but if it is only some particular side of the activity of an


CHAPTER XIV
looked as if by that slight motion the army itself was expressing its

“You just wait a moment, my dear fellow, and listen,” interrupted
want to dance well. Her enormous figure stood erect, her powerful arms


have to leave Moscow without having accomplished his aim, and have

think about entirely apart from general questions. Two days previously

Anna Mikháylovna.
carriage. “Get in with me,” said he to Bolkónski.
and pour out to him his indignation against the French and especially
voice.
disposition of the forces, so as to know his bearings should he be sent
therefore could not do so. “Russia and summer weather are not bound

kissed him full on the lips, and disengaging her little hands pressed
tone of entreaty and reproach that a carpenter uses to a gentleman who

“All right, all right,” he said, throwing the bits under the table.
“Only take care you and your Cossacks are not all captured!” said
abominable, quite abominable!” said Prince Andrew, and he went off to
    CHAPTER II
The conversation did not flag all evening and turned chiefly on the
“And I know why she’d be ashamed,” said Pétya, offended by

coats.
When it was suggested to him that he should enter the civil service,

out of Moscow.”
defile through narrow village streets when we are marching against the
had slept badly that night, those around him reported. The cause of this

being carried out or moved about, and the mirrors and pictures had been
orderly, who, with the peculiar contempt with which a commander in
“We’ve given it ‘em hot, mate! They won’t make another push
the anteroom. “I can’t remain any longer in Petersburg. Tell me what
then, Wostóv, now then!”

had apportioned the use of the income from them. Julie saw Borís’


firmness and certainty of his vocation, which radiated from his whole

During all these discussions Pfuel and his interpreter, Wolzogen
It very often happened that in a moment of irritation husband and wife
there would be least danger.
He descended the knoll and began walking up and down before it.
not venture to ask any questions, and shut the door again, now sitting
“Well, where did you disappear to?” inquired Denísov.
attendance as he was in mufti and had come to Tilsit without permission

them with the other squadrons.

time!”
victory which was conveyed, not only by the tales of those who had taken

beside themselves over there and one can’t make anything out.”

to regain their former affectation of indifference. For a long time they
very important matter.”
the favors of a very important personage and Borís had only recently
these two glanced vainly at the onlookers with only a silent appeal for
“If the animals in front are continually changing and the direction of
student, who now, Bolkónski thought, held in his hands—those plump
tried to swim on, some in the saddle and some clinging to their horses’


impossible... Oh, how pleasant it was at home!... The knave, double or
On hearing this indifferent voice, Rostóv grew frightened at what
news with delight, he could not resist the temptation.
advisers!” said he. “If we had listened to them all we should not have
Timókhin. “Who would spare himself now? The soldiers in my battalion,


with people dressed in furs continued to drive past, carrying away the



one of the guests. “The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur,” said she
The historians quite falsely represent Napoleon’s faculties as having
youth. “Don’t let him go, lads! Let him answer us! Keep him!” shouted

black on one side and with a silvery light on the other. Beneath the
shoulders and struck an attitude.
of the people of Central Europe to the movement; the same hesitation
went into the maids’ room. There an old maidservant was grumbling at
such an unfortunate and charming woman! Don’t mention him before
sudden emphasis on the word her—“as a mother receives her zealous sons
You can undertake the theater, I society, and you, Hippolyte, of course
hand holding the Order touched one of Lázarev’s buttons. It was as if
love her, for that would be impossible.
still choked her.
Pelagéya Danílovna smiled.
midnight, after he had left the countess’ apartments, he was sitting

face, which had been so radiantly happy all that saint’s day, suddenly
many months she felt calm and not oppressed by the thought of the life

death.”

new in them was a certain uneasiness and occasional discord, which there
an action committed a second ago I must still recognize it as not


“But I should like to see the right flank. They say it’s very strong,”
Whatever happens it always appears that just that event was foreseen
countess will be here in a few days. The countess is in a dreadful
and sit in a mosque, so in Moscow he must be beneficent like the Tsars.
The dispositions cited above are not at all worse, but are even
just like a man—selfish and cruel! I expected nothing else. A woman
weakness tied him to the spot; he wished to get up and go away, but
Bonaparte’s side.”


“Princess, my dear, there’s someone driving up the avenue!” she

a retirement into the depths of the country in accordance with precise
their relation is always one of inverse proportion.
A conference took place confined to the magnates sitting at the table.
And suddenly the sequence of these thoughts broke off, and Prince Andrew
supposed, long ago have effaced? But the spirit and the movements were
A church procession was coming up the hill from Borodinó. First along
“I had heard that it happens like this, and you must have heard it
When Rostóv entered the room, the princess dropped her eyes for an

approached, receded, and rose, he realized what was happening at the


“But I will, I’ll give the order at once.”
“If his excellency had been at home, as a kinsman he would of course...
Denísov’s voice from the next room.
never to dare to change your way of dress without my consent.”


silk stockings and white satin shoes with ribbons were already on; the
go Natásha came in with rapid steps, not having done up her hair or
shared with all her heart in the prayer for the spirit of righteousness,

lining. Pierre was about to begin reading.

they did not heed her, and at last succeeded in making them believe her.
Yet it was she, dressed in a new gown which he did not know, made since

other soldiers. He stood looking about him, when suddenly he heard a
“Well, it doesn’t matter,” said Prince Andrew. “Tell Countess Rostóva
Dunyásha, the nurse, and Michael Ivánovich following her.

or his actions!”
question for her to refuse him. And therefore Nicholas’ first feeling
that she could not share it; but she could not understand the joys and

“I? Wait a bit, wait.... Yes, first I thought that we are driving
ill. Perhaps this is only a rumor.”
on the Russian army with double its strength and destroy it; negotiate
him, he had puckered his forehead painfully as if vainly seeking to
not carry the weapon in his hand through the streets. It was difficult
laughed with quiet enjoyment.

The French, with the memory of all their former victories during
Eighth Company as a shelter from the north, propped up by musket rests,
latterly spent whole days at home, that is, in Prince Vasíli’s house
the Council of State, stood at the table with a beaming countenance. His
side. The soldiers’ faces were more and more clearly visible. Rostóv,
part like the rest, Dron was made village Elder and overseer of
plain that at that moment there was in Natásha’s heart no thought of
laugh—a laugh such as one hears on the stage. Someone—it sounded
Nicholas arrived at the governor’s rather late, but with the phrase
height and stoutness, and the strange morose look of suffering in his
song, arousing an involuntary sensation of courage and cheerfulness.
essence of life, and the laws defining that essence.



he had ridden out at the head of the Guards, in his casque and cavalry
line to reconnoiter personally, and twice to the Emperors, Russian and
    CHAPTER V
CHAPTER III
general saying something to those around him. Pierre, accompanied by the
see the soldiers’ shaggy caps, distinguish the officers from the men,
ourselves to the fact that for our epoch histories of that kind are


oats.”
society had entered the simple feeling of the attraction of a healthy
influence of a variety of exciting sensations. Only Pierre and


“How strange it is! It’s as if it were a dream! I like that.”
your honor should be appointed a member, but without a salary.”
eyes, pensively swaying her head and feeling an unexpected flow of
You, peaceful inhabitants of Moscow, artisans and workmen whom
that sort of man), he gave Borís a pleasant smile, frowned as with
the greater part of the men had to halt and an unpleasant consciousness
“Despite my great respect for old Kutúzov,” he continued, “we
right on the other side.”
Lodge—were so strong that he could not resist them. Again whole days,
the last interview he had had with the old prince at the time of the
short from the sudden fright, but then they resumed their flight,
He had left home only to escape the intricate tangle of life’s demands
Rostóv threw his cloak over his shoulders, shouted to Lavrúshka to

“All our stupidity, Yákov Alpátych,” came the answers, and the crowd
Countess Mary well knew that mood of his, and when she herself was in
“Now then, let’s see how far it will carry, Captain. Just try!”
program—or even admitting that some one general program of these

poisoned the artificial tranquillity which he managed to obtain in
silence brooding over the house and within it held her fast.
orders.
the suite pointed out to Bagratión a French column that was outflanking
“I have neither taste nor smell,” he remarked, sniffing at his glass.
     * (2) “House of my Mother.”
vivants. Napoleon rode up the high ground at Semënovsk, and through the
still more flushed, commanded the men more scrupulously than ever. The
commander in chief’s suite. He was in a state of suppressed excitement
help regretting having been left in ignorance of what was happening, and
and in romantic love for Natásha; he had sought it by reasoning—and all
Secondly, it would have been senseless to block the passage of men whose
The enormous study was full of things evidently in constant use.
“Oh, I must give you a treat,” Bilíbin whispered to Bolkónski.

before him from the hill, and with his whole soul followed the movement
Karáy finished scratching his hindquarters and, cocking his ears, got

Mary.
strange, unknown, and dangerous places he reaches, just as a sailor is
double the value of the property.
then already it bore within itself the germs of inevitable ruin. How
in his fine gray eyes, and on his delicate lips the same capacity for
Pierre took the packet. Prince Andrew, as if trying to remember whether
over his shoulder, as when Rostóv had seen him on the eve of the battle
open it. Someone was holding it shut.
he desired it the less he allowed himself to believe it. This question


And flourishing his whip he rode off at a gallop for the first time
towns in the interior. You will be responsible if the enemy is able to
further strengthened in him by the high opinion his fellow prisoners
brave?”
money nor the time, like Prince Galítsyn, to engage a master to teach me
Only now, when he was confronted by the stern authorities, did his guilt
gazed at Bolkónski silently with wide-open eyes.
joyfully when listening to such stories, now and then putting in a word
There was no laughter in the maids’ large hall. In the men servants’
Pierre’s legitimation? Do you understand that in consideration of the
for your sake.”

will be so kind, I’ll fix a time and go down to the estate just for a

“But I never said a word about the Emperor!” said the officer,

detachment, peasants from the adjacent villages, and residents who had

“Posterity will do him justice,” he concluded, and at once turned to
never be his.
Davout was not merely a French general, but a man notorious for his
It would be difficult to explain why and whither ants whose heap

on some acquaintances who were back in Moscow, and he intended to leave
“What! It is as if I were glad of a chance to take advantage of

“But really, hadn’t I better go away?” he asked, looking kindly at

and particularly amiable smile.
An adjutant galloped up from the flèches with a pale and frightened face
CHAPTER VI

before the icon. All the others did the same. Then the count embraced
“Shall I loose them or not?” Nicholas asked himself as the wolf
“but nothing more would come of it. There will soon be a battalion of
“Is he still here?” she asked, quickly.
“No, stop!” said Anatole. “Shut the door; we have first to sit down.
“Thank God!” said Prince Vasíli. “My wife has told me
impassive face?” Prince Andrew asked himself as he looked. Prince
The victory gained did not bring the usual results because the peasants
pitied. She has no one, no one. To tell the truth, I don’t need her,
carpets. “Now press, Pétya! Press, Vasílich, press hard!” she cried.
“Hurrah!”... Then the general march, and again “Hurrah! Hurrah!”


difficulty.
A French colonel of hussars, who had evidently just left his bed, came

They had decided to be at the ball by half-past ten, and Natásha had
princess on hearing the news.
He was riding almost along the front line. A handful of men came
the flagstaff that had been dropped beside him. (The flag had already
with jests and to come to business. He involuntarily looked round at the


former battles, instead of the news they expected of the enemy’s flight,
At half-past five Napoleon rode to the village of Shevárdino.
CHAPTER XII
so that the water splashed in the air, and, having disappeared for an

A man without convictions, without habits, without traditions, without


In a corner of the hut stood a standard captured from the French, and
contributed much to the magnificence of the spectacle. It was Borís
village joined the haulers, and the wattle wall, which was about
small detachments defeat larger ones, obscurely admits the existence



in discussion with the sole object of offending one another. But the

in her former place. It was dark in the room especially where they were

been able to analyze his feelings he would have found that his steady,
rustle and tramp of the French troops already beginning to move to take
Five minutes later no one remained in the street. The cook, with her
commanding officer, to hand in a complaint about it.”
Beausset’s face and he glided away to the other generals.

Pierre.
that flank march. But it is hard to understand why military writers,
unfinished novel, Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis.

mingled into the same sweet and solemn hymn. “Oh, this is delightful!

the prince, tied his head up with a handkerchief that the mouth should
not to let him see her cheered Princess Mary. She knew it was a proof
“Now come, come! Be reasonable. I know your excellent heart.”
“My dear fellow, you are a hero!” said Bilíbin.
CHAPTER XVIII

the 3rd Corps who, not satisfied with taking from the unfortunate
“When he looked at my feet, friend... well, thinks I...”
went there and found two thirds of the men and horses knocked out, two
Rostóv did not know or remember how he ran to his place and mounted.


to be called cowards, ashamed to leave, but still they left, knowing
expression of his sister’s face to see if she was in earnest. Then he
regiment.
and cries, and smelled blood and powder, and a feeling of horror and
go to the devil!” Pfuel was one of those theoreticians who so love

following was written:
longer they did so without saying what they wanted to say, the greater
word that Hardenburg says, or Haugwitz either. This famous Prussian
French by Wittgenstein, “the hero of Petropol” as he was then called in
The farther they fled the more wretched became the plight of the
was damp and he began to cough; Alpátych came to Yaroslávl with reports
no one there.” But he had hardly entered the room before he felt her
did that subject grow and the weaker and more inadequate did her powers

him in the terrible position of appearing ridiculous—that he had been




proprietor’s goods and packing them on the carts, and Dron, liberated at
Russian. Prince Andrew listened and observed in silence.
to what he had felt at the Slobóda Palace during the Emperor’s visit—a
Sorrow, it seems, is our common lot, my dear, tender friend Julie.
type, and a young woman. That very young woman seemed to Pierre the


still. She did not herself know how or why the exclamation escaped her

each of them again training two others and all being closely united,
him. “It’s all one to you! You’ll dig up your pot of money and take
imagination a new plan of life. On the previous evening at the Lodge, he

Pierre leaped up from the sofa and rushed staggering toward her.
on a few steps he stopped before Prince Andrew, who lay on his back with

soldiers forming the picket line, like showmen exhibiting a curiosity,


turned to Anna Mikháylovna, answering her query by a movement of the
have experienced. Joseph Alexéevich is living poorly and has for three
“Some are, and some aren’t—like us.”
Having finished his tale about the enchanting Polish lady, the captain
look of sincere penitence, and Prince Andrew glanced so meekly now at


“Ice pudding, but you won’t get any,” said Márya Dmítrievna.

He woke up...
“The whole town is singing their praises and I don’t even know
drawn into the campaign by lot or by conscription. This could not be
latter’s good-natured naïveté was so boundless that sometimes even he
at Prince Andrew, evidently considering something.
pale, stood near. Judging by their faces they were both Frenchmen. With
it turns out that ‘the enemy of the human race’ pays no heed to

general expanded his chest and rode, frowning, beside him to the

Napoleon and his marshals—and that aim was not merely frustrated but all
On receiving this dispatch the Emperor sent Prince Volkónski to Kutúzov
son.
Nicholas Bolkónski also in a whisper.
and cross by its three bridges, advancing to the same heights as

Lorrain, pursing up his lips, waved a severely negative finger before
recalling Bilíbin’s words.

choking, hot dust that never cooled even at night. Some of this dust
the path of his calèche. Ahead of the rest and nearer to him ran a
her abroad for consultations there, and had he not been able to explain
who entered the room and glanced uneasily around, evidently expecting


after two in the morning, thoughts come and I can’t sleep but toss
Balashëv went into a small reception room, one door of which led into a
awkwardness or intentionally (no one could have said which) after the

but I think it would now be better to stay here,” said Mademoiselle
lodge meetings, enrolled new members, and busied himself uniting various
published,” recounted Bítski, emphasizing certain words and opening
door, making a final effort to hold it back—to lock it was no longer
Guards?” asked Napoleon sternly.

within him, as happens at critical moments of life. Whether it was from
dissipated their property—that being the chief fault of which he was
The same faces, the same talk, Papa holding his cup and blowing in the
after Natásha down the passage into the sitting room with flushed face
Pierre smiled, but his smile showed that he knew it was not the story
The English will come off badly, you know, if Napoleon gets across the
“Vile woman!” shouted the princess, darting unexpectedly at Anna
The problem is that regarding man as a subject of observation
was dying without glory, or because he was sorry to part with life,
escape from this muddle, indecision, intricacy, and weakness.

proofs of Nikólenka’s virtues. How strange, how extraordinary, how
been ordered to return to military service—and especially since his last
“It doesn’t matter to me. I only wish it for your sake.”
know his character: noble, upright ... but you see he has no one with
not admit of the possibility of abandoning Moscow, and the commander in
The more closely a man was engaged in the events then taking place in
the Emperor about him; so that in the case of his death—and he is
it were lightheartedly.
felt in her heart a devout and tremulous awe at the thought of the
About 80,000 went in payments on all the estates to the Land Bank, about
was under no obligation to meet, and did not rebuild his Moscow house
enthusiasm—was only the loss of the battle of Austerlitz, the
“Is that you, Clément?” he asked. “Where the devil...?” But, noticing
and gloomy faces grew ever paler and gloomier.

“Dearest... and me!”
indispensable soldiers to give to the French who, though not harmful, or

Mademoiselle Bourienne.


in the garden.
An Anonymous Volunteer, and David Widger
The officers gathered round Denísov’s canteen, eating and talking.
Moscow and Petersburg, came to see him. Berg arrived in an immaculate
Mademoiselle Bourienne came into Princess Mary’s room smiling and
less than the others forced his way in to see him and, turning the
higher the human intellect rises in the discovery of these purposes,
tucked up, without a coat, pale and with a trembling jaw, came out
faint with fear lest the baby should be drowned in the font, and awaited
thing!”
Davout, spectacles on nose, sat bent over a table at the further end of
troubled by his sleeplessness: his soul was as fresh and joyful as if he
orders concerning the movement of the mass of the troops. A similar
before he died?” thought Pierre. He recalled Karatáev and his death and
promenade, or a play. Her dresses were always of the latest fashion.



unexpectedly through his mind.

shall perish of my debauchery if Thou utterly desertest me!

how they keep asking me, and I’m glad of it, I’m happy and I love
“We must give reserves,” he said, moving his arms slightly apart.
the other, still more reasonably, says that it is too depressing and
such love,” said Prince Andrew. “It is not at all the same feeling
The sound of three more shots came from the gate.
the commander with a tone of suffering in his voice, while there were

Márya Ignátevna Perónskaya, a thin and shallow maid of honor at
feelings of others, and had he at all understood what Pierre’s feelings
battles four times more men than the French army; the burning of Moscow
Our army, after repeated retreats and advances and battles at Pultúsk

We have still six hundred quarters left,” he inquired.
Pierre (wearing the coachman’s coat which Gerásim had procured for him
cautiously and glanced into the room, Sónya standing beside her at the

mouth with his handkerchief.


the meaning of the square and all the various figures of the temple of
the historian who judges Alexander will also after the lapse of some

the calamities that would follow the abandonment of the city and the
lofty sky before? And how happy I am to have found it at last! Yes! All

soon as he had seen a visitor off he returned to one of those who were
celebration of the season.
even conceive that Napoleon together with other influences was the cause

well—we must manage as best we can!”

not help loving the countess and the whole Rostóv family, but neither
last of the inhabitants who were leaving.
practical woman that she was, had even managed by favor with army
post station.
Lieutenant Colonel Denísov, better known as ‘Váska,’” said Denísov,
the candlestick of which the cockroaches that had been gnawing it were
this reinforcement.
her heart. Happy the man who wins her! With her the least worldly of men
for him. That’s the sort of fellow he is. His father keeps a cookshop
when he stayed in (as he said) for Pierre’s sake, hardly exchanged a
“Of course! It’s marvelous. So bold, so easy!”


something that was evidently wrong and that he ought not to do. But at
army, and even Napoleon himself with his staff, were not on the far side
and he often thought about her. But he never thought about her as he
implanted in us merely to torment us and never be satisfied. But Pierre

laughter that convulsed his usually impassive features.
of an event; but how a book, Le Contrat Social, had the effect of making
Rostóv went to Telyánin’s quarters.
heal completely only as the result of a vital force from within.
the men moved forward.
an hussar officer, and an old friend of his.
with his hand. Looking more closely Pierre recognized the blue-gray dog,


to Denísov almost simultaneously, requesting him to join up with their
“It’s not my business!” he exclaimed, and strode on quickly down one of
without looking at her—filled him with enchantment.
family consultation; is it not so, Prince?”

no longer was and at that moment considered themselves happy.
Alpátych at a gliding trot, only just managing not to run, kept up with
train bands under the walls of the capital, but that he still could not
hillside. You can imagine!”
then both voices together with glad intonations, and then footsteps.
resolved to wait till she should see Nicholas, not in order to set him
“I prefer not to take lessons from anyone, but I can die with my men as
“There now!” said one of the soldiers.
footsteps running along the path. She rose and saw Dunyásha her maid,

and life at Otrádnoe was quieter than in former years, but still the
these things. I absolutely must see him, however painful it may be for
“Vereshchágin was tried and condemned to death,” thought Rostopchín
Pierre’s physical condition, as is always the case, corresponded to his
always occupied his mind—about life and death, and chiefly about death.
without laughing, but could not resist looking at him: so to be out of

meaninglessly, breathless with irrational animal fury and the need to
like a skin, and he spoke with a particularly refined compression of his
the group and shouted at Míshka.

room. The old man already knew everything. He was standing close to
Dolgorúkov laughed merrily.
“If he starts a row I’ll go away,” said Prince Anatole. “I
Bald Hills was exposed. Dessalles wrote this letter to the Governor
duc even the most partial ceased to regard him as a hero. If to some
awakening.
Pierre changed places several times during the game, sitting now with
thick bones. Tíkhon with equal accuracy would split logs with blows at
CHAPTER XXIII
Alexéevich came in from the drawing room. I seemed to know at once that
ventured to ask him what her father was doing.
can tell whether I saw anything or not?” flashed through Sónya’s

behind the door. Ten minutes later, all the young Melyukóvs joined the
his nostrils having been torn off, “all in due form” as Karatáev put it,
After receiving this news late in the evening, when he was alone in his
path in life of their own, and like me were brought by force of

a white cap with a red band was visible, his gray nape sunk between his

Tíkhon readily joined.

firm began to pull on his jacket without looking about him, but suddenly
“Very good!” said the prince closing the door behind him, and
should it react just on Louis XVI? And what is the time limit for such
In the second case, if freedom were possible without inevitability we
there were five Russians for every Frenchman. Not on that day alone
there was nothing to be said, and neither wished to give occasion for
came to his former chief with an order from the commander of the rear
But in that case the question arises whether all the activity of the
place of fodder, and sat down to dine round the caldrons from which
of truth, my dear sir, but have thrust her into an abyss of deceit and

accepted Pierre’s taking up his residence in the house without surprise,

“Why, that’s our Tíkhon,” said the esaul.
CHAPTER XXXIII
are childwen of the dust... but one falls in love and one is a God, one
reading his paper and specially drew Rostóv’s attention to the
horses jostled one another and neighed, not disturbing the choir but
“I have already told you, Papa,” said his son, “that if you
pity for me. Why is it?”
collecting a library and has made it a rule not to buy a new book
Bonaparte, there is a difference,” remarked Bolkónski.

The crowd round the icon suddenly parted and pressed against Pierre.
The one thing he now desired with his whole soul was to get away quickly

Andrew, and in a determined, ringing, and unpleasant tone he continued:
From broken remarks about Natásha and his father, from the emotion with
“Why haven’t they carried him away?” Pierre was about to ask, but seeing
talked some nonsense. Dessalles, that fool, said something. Something in
How quickly! Now I know that not because of her alone, nor of myself
of Alexander’s sisters was spoken of. But besides considerations of
“In that case he is inviting his doom by awaiting our attack,” said
understand that she could be outwardly so calm and natural.

Old Prince Nicholas Bolkónski received a letter from Prince Vasíli
behind him Bondarchúk, an hussar he knew, jolted against him and looked

All his painstaking and energetic activity (in how far it was useful
comme il faut and in the latest fashion. This Natásha noticed at once.
The count, forgetting to smooth out the smile on his face, looked into
thought which history must adopt are being worked out simultaneously
A young round-faced officer, quite a boy still and evidently only just
Though Balashëv was used to imperial pomp, he was amazed at the luxury
Rostóv could already see their faces and heard the command:
looted.
otherwise than through himself.)
suffered, but I would not exchange even that torment for anything in

came for water and went back into the hollow, but perhaps he had simply
bright, sparkling blue eyes into his antagonist’s face. His mouth wore
“three,” he went quickly forward, missing the trodden path and
“You have met him, Aunt?” said she in a calm voice, unable herself to
any step. Had his wife come to him, he would not have turned her away.
looked at the crowd without seeking anyone, and her delicate arm, bare

report of a signaling gun followed, and the troops, who were already
I devoted myself to him! So there! Oh yes, mon cher, he is the greatest
consciousness of the impotence of his once mighty arm, produced an

At dinner the talk turned on the war, the approach of which was becoming
“Well?” asked Napoleon.
It was clearing, and over the tops of the trees clouds were swiftly
but when Princess Mary had drawn the blinds and was going away she
though offended. “Yes... no... to Petersburg? Tomorrow—but I won’t say
to him quite possible.
difficult to explain what caused the Russians after the departure of the
Not only was the Russian army on the twenty-sixth defended by weak,
been forwarded by courier to the commander in chief.
face to make it bleed, shouted in a tearful voice: “Police! Murder!...

ought to have made that effort, for as long as the Russians continued to

lads, that this man,’ he says, ‘is being tortured innocently and for
correspondence with her, wrote patriotic letters from Moscow.

traces of their horses with trembling hands.
baby, an old woman, and a healthy German girl with bright red cheeks
something disconcerting to himself.
home receiving no one and going nowhere.
of War needlessly deviating.”
lain motionless, growing cold before them. Natásha went up, looked at
forbidding the men to disperse about the town, sternly forbidding any
laughed.
“Why don’t you enter the service, Uncle?”
a game of boston, and at night she had the newspapers or a new book read

“Perhaps I have. Perhaps all is over between me and Bolkónski. Why do
experienced a feeling of joy, freedom, and life; but when during his
looking at him, made some reply to Borís who sat down beside her. After
to that most powerful engine of ignorance, the diffusion of printed
the enemy, had taken prisoners, and once had even captured Marshal
pleased, all history would be a series of disconnected incidents.

Vladímir medal and ribbon? But now, even if they do get peppered, the
On the first arrival of the news of the battle of Austerlitz, Moscow had
began weeping and kissing Prince Andrew’s knee.

“Uncle” dismounted at the porch of his little wooden house which
the pretext. When she wanted to be agitated, Nicholas and his health

of his, and that he was not called on to judge concerning them and
rulers under conditions which they regard as known. (With this method
months. Besides that, four times a year, on the name days and birthdays
On the thirteenth of June a rather small, thoroughbred Arab horse was
from the time he entered Moscow till the time he left it. The absence
“Be quiet, quiet!” The prince slapped his hand on the table. “Yes, I
Impossible!” And suddenly he was seized by a panic of fear for himself
dispositions; nor that which Count Orlóv-Denísov may have had in view—to
battle of Borodinó, and if this or that other arrangement depended on

In the fourth act there was some sort of devil who sang waving his arm
width of the field, an enormous mass of cavalry in brilliant white
Pierre mastered his wrath. “I don’t know that and don’t want to,” he
even got to their right place, but too late to be of any use and only
Buonapartes. But I warn you, if you don’t tell me that this means war,
clavichord.
introduced him to his guests, explaining that he was not a civilian, but
marry the prince”—he meant the younger man—and he crooked one finger,
and ministers, and by the lives of Napoleon, Rousseau, Diderot,
from one to another, grew stronger and reached its climax when they all
to the door. Sónya went away by another door. From the room in which
carriage horses on their heads, turning them aside, others fought among
eyes and saw close before him the head and ears of the horse he was
at the palace of the Tsars, at which Russian notables and his own would
that enmeshed him, and which in his present condition he was unable
order. You are causing me to lose the fruits of a campaign. Break
The war was flaming up and nearing the Russian frontier. Everywhere one
came galloping up on a Cossack horse that could scarcely carry his
say: “What can one do with our Russian peasants?” and imagined that he
“Who?”
“Yes, I am a Mason,” Pierre replied.

for him to think that anything disgraceful had happened to his beloved
are very pale!” said Princess Mary in alarm, running with her soft,
Prince Andrew began to reply and to state his own plan, which might

and frequent blushes she told him she was very sorry about their past
the same direction; on the other hand an army corps could not surrender
superior to Napoleon’s, were concentrated in one place, the troops
beside him. “That must be the enemy’s camp!”
set fire to the Schön Grabern village, delayed the French advance. The
Danube, marching on us, you, and your lines of communication.”
“Well, gentlemen, I see that it is I who will have to pay for the broken
and giving orders, engrossed him. The burning of Smolénsk and its
showed a paper she held in her hand—with the verses Nicholas had


reason but by something else. There was within him a deep unexpressed
for the infantry!” he exclaimed as Pétya rode up to him.
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth
the right time! You mustn’t trifle with it, you know, or it may turn to
regular life, with diverse branches of commerce and craftsmanship, with
“And why has the Emperor Alexander taken command of the armies? What is
go.

Prince Andrew’s mind.
he believed implicitly. Yet strange to say Borís’ presence in his


arrived. One of Pierre’s acquaintances, while they were talking about
“Der Krieg muss in Raum verlegt werden. Der Ansicht kann ich nicht genug
“And will she soon be confined?” and shaking his head reproachfully
tenderness.
then she smiled again and clutched Prince Vasíli’s arm more tightly.
her face in her handkerchief, and her whole stout body shook with
“You are not asleep?”
Next morning, having taken leave of no one but the count, and not
or gray horses; then again, spreading out with the brazen clatter of the

in chief’s office were gathered Kutúzov himself, Weyrother, and the

was joyfully conscious of a return of that self-sacrificing spirit in
had been insulted through his daughter. The insult was the more pointed


harming no one but necessary to the happiness of others—are called
    CHAPTER III
On returning to Górki after having seen Prince Andrew, Pierre ordered
alive—live: tomorrow you’ll die as I might have died an hour ago.
the commander in chief.
worth mentioning. But in the secret depths of her soul the question
and princes with whom he was dissatisfied, presented pearls and diamonds
them that when they have thought of two or three contingencies” (he
birthday, we shall receive news. I have a favorable presentiment!”
that could be said for those who drew up this project, for it was not
“For God’s sake, Sónya, don’t tell anyone, don’t torture



door into the huntsmen’s room, from which came the clear sounds of a
consecutive series of commands corresponding to a series of events, and
understand, agitated her. She said nothing but looked about uneasily as
The man who had devastated France returns to France alone, without any
The prince again laughed his frigid laugh.
displeasure—said in Vílna that to carry the war beyond the frontier is
ball was even happier. They were both dressed in white muslin with pink
a few minutes later the chief forces of the French army moved rapidly
said, introducing broken French into his own German, that he was the
flank—still more obstinately. We should have attacked Napoleon in the

doing a little—though I did very little and did it very badly? What
cleared his throat and sang his favorite hunting song:
inclinations, allurement by the grandeur of the preparations, and the
“No? She is very nice and kind and, above all, she’s much to be
very serious talk.”

ask forgiveness.
of Paul I of Russia who recognizes his government; chance contrives
Rostóv’s thoughts, as is usual in such cases, were behind him, with
Dmítrievna. “My advice to you is finish your business and go back
a white uniform that looked strange among the Russian black ones. The
Montesquieu,” he added with a smile. “You know how much I...” he began
Ferapóntov came out after her, but on seeing Alpátych adjusted his
that same year and, as always happens, after the father’s death the
as I write?
In truth everything presented itself in a dark and gloomy light to
He now often remembered his conversation with Prince Andrew and quite
across the bodies and under a terrible fire from the French, he attended
through the door on tiptoe. He could not walk well on tiptoe and his
“Where did I disappear to? I went to get Frenchmen,” answered Tíkhon

“Yes, yes,” assented Pierre.

human life.
why did six hundred thousand men go to fight when Napoleon uttered
was a profound one. And it is even more difficult to understand just why
out.

extinguished and some spirit lighted, as Pierre knew by the smell, and
though what happened was due to chance and was independent of the
where it’ll get rubbed? I don’t like that way of doing things. Let it
that moment an immense number of things passed dimly through both their
had been on the Semënovsk heights the artillery commander had proposed

“It will fit better still when it sets to your body,” said Karatáev,
went on rapidly. “General Barclay de Tolly risked his life everywhere at
many spiritual doubts and joys.
cards, holding them in his hand, and lifting his head, “if it comes out,
judgment, the more doubtful becomes my belief in the freedom of my
Staël, read novels, liked the society of pretty women, jested with
Prince Andrew looked kindly at him, yet his glance—friendly and
words “Russian army”), “I tell you frankly that we, the commanders, far
the boots.
and his visit to Brünn. At the door he found a vehicle half full of
Princess Mary turned with absent-minded questioning look to Pierre, who
disappeared he noticed that the eyes of all in the room turned to him
The approaching riders having descended a decline were no longer
last Mademoiselle Bourienne gave a scream and ran away. Anatole bowed to
should fascinate her husband as much as she did before he became her
Kaysárov was about to draw back the curtain of the window facing
At the front an altercation occurred between an Austrian guide and a
those conceptions.
handsome, happy young face, he experienced a feeling of tenderness
was still sitting at the side of the road under the birch tree and two

aide-de-camp, and sat down in the lady’s chair, placing his huge hands
the first to seize the surrendering French officer by his collar. Our
gentleman who was particularly anxious to make the young count’s
“Lise!” was all Prince Andrew said. But that one word expressed
clavichord and that there would be dancing, and so everyone had come as
description of the last Petersburg fete she addressed her brother:
by the fire. One of them stumbled.
marry!” concluded Prince Andrew.
SECOND EPILOGUE
the bridge and not let us cross? But it will please our sovereign the
their own plight still worse, treated them with particular moroseness

movements of the crowd had any sense. So one might have thought that

and decided in his own mind that all was as it should be, and that in

Bennigsen was a landlord in the Vílna province who appeared to be doing
he kept nodding to show that he understood, Anatole went on translating


dim, but definite and in the concise form in which he imagined himself

“Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?”

recognized at once.

rug and began reading to him from a manuscript book an explanation of

grateful for the benefits conferred on them. Everywhere were receptions,
“What is it?” asked the countess, startled; but seeing by her
rather short, as if surprised that anyone should not know him.
a man of education, who speaks French. He is a Russian seigneur who has
friends and associations, besides the comforts of life of which he had
was in attendance, to include him in the suite appointed for the stay at
same way little by little he came to understand the news he had been
a more comprehensible way than Pfuel himself (who was a harsh, bookish
“Come in, come in!” he added to the princess.
“I think no one has been more courted than she,” she went on, “but
at that moment and down the steps into the yard.
usual. The members who were assembling for dinner were sitting about

where what he had seen was.
still looking silently at her brother and her beautiful eyes were full
It was just the moment before a big dinner when the assembled guests,
his place she concluded, from the rapid manner in which after taking
sister. “Why isn’t she dull and ashamed?”
flower tubs and hid there.
soldier while conducting service, and a French official reported of
he added, and was about to go to the drawing room.
with a solemn gesture raised his arm.
even possible to express that hatred by fighting a battle, when
feelings, but if that were so, he would say for the last time.... But he
acquaintance has left, but as seldom happens, no one said anything but

Bagratión and Dolgorúkov ride past with their adjutants. All the fear

out of this position; that here was the Toulon that would lift him from

joyous sensation.
in on his beauty sleep.
several instances.
look at that oak, as if expecting something from it. Under the oak,

And so to imagine the action of a man entirely subject to the law of
life vanished after the engagement of Andrew and Natásha and the death
could be heard. It was there Prince Andrew thought the fight would
saw, and one I shall never forget—that of my dear sister-in-law—left

society, and so her position now is not a rosy one. We should enter into
it was approved by the staff and accepted as a basis for action.
disengaged herself from the dogs, with tail tucked in again, went

Mère to be inscribed on the charitable institutions, thereby combining
hand to his ear toward Weyrother, with the air of a man absorbed in
Princess Mary threw a shawl over her head and ran to meet the newcomer.
Man in connection with the general life of humanity appears subject

defense of the city; amazed also at the novel outlook revealed to him
says that the movement of the wheels is the cause refutes himself, for
moment and then continuing the conversation. They were now discussing
elopements are like,” continued Dólokhov with a wink. “Why, she’ll rush
“Well, so that’s finished, my dear fellow! I am very glad to have
his musket walked away.
seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg’s territory, and the Russian Note,
and had brought from there these connections with the Napoleonic
Andrew, greatly changed and plainly in better health, but with a fresh
flew out empty; now they fly out laden. The beekeeper opens the lower
“When loving with human love one may pass from love to hatred, but
“La balance y est... * A German knows how to skin a flint, as the
last begins to remember what happened before one was in the world....”
his habit, and crowded Rostóv in the narrow shanty. Rostóv looked at him
still more attractive to them. Returning from the yard, the doctor

frowned for an instant, but immediately mastering himself went up to the
“How can you show me that you are telling the truth?” said Davout
that his voice rang far through the rooms.
lying down.
“Yes, yes, let us go,” said Rostóv hastily, and lowering his
At the end of January Pierre went to Moscow and stayed in an annex of
take Murat prisoner; nor the result of immediately destroying the whole
later on. Oh, how glad I am to have you!”
dressing gown, this lunatic was running impetuously, his gaze fixed on
“Yes, this is the one thing left me now,” he said with a sigh.
Mikháylovna of one of them.
with Rostopchín’s own permission. Yet all the same this information
“They can’t do anything... always make some muddle,” he muttered.

And he again turned to Pierre.
“Oh, a very wise man is Prince Kutúzov! I have known him a long time!”
as to the further progress of the war. In this letter Prince Andrew
again struck up, the count and countess kissed, and the guests, leaving
silent. At first Kutúzov stood still while the regiment moved; then he
“People are being arrested...” said the count. “I’ve told the countess
the genius Napoleon and, suddenly recognizing him as a brigand, sent him
forehead.
treachery. But it is a turbulent crowd, your excellency—I hardly managed
The prince gave orders that no one should leave his post. Now you,
behaving himself, and in general...”
countess, “but I always wanted Nicholas to marry the princess, and had a
“Oh, the faiwy! She can do anything with me!” said Denísov, and
father, and then talk of rules of war and magnanimity to foes! Take no
understanding of power for true gold.
CHAPTER XII
She was again hemmed in.
“God is merciful, doctors are never needed,” she said.
“Have you told her?” asked Natásha, suddenly beaming all over with
beyond Moscow. And the troops retired one more, last, day’s march, and
“but no, they will take it their own way, they won’t understand! They
pale, with compressed lips and feverishly glittering eyes.
looking at the puff from the gun that had sent the ball. His eyes
agree on, and if a seller is unable to obtain a fair price he will be
sorry for her that there was no room in his soul for reproach.
Troops were still crowding at the Yaúza bridge. It was hot. Kutúzov,
he had received a letter from Prince Theodore, asking him to come
battlefield.
The city police is established on its former footing, and better order

time was glad he had surprised her at it and that she would now have to

back, and between the two rows, which separated, the Emperor entered to
act basely. But he also knew (or rather felt at the bottom of his heart)
refused without the least difficulty or effort, and was afterwards
had taken while passing through Moscow, he left the kvass to Morel and
beginning to feel for the pretty and provocative Mademoiselle Bourienne

“Oh, to die, to die for him,” thought Rostóv.
historians, another, newer force—the idea—is added, the connection of
“Well,” he went on with an evident effort at self-control and coherence.


war has deprived me of one of the associations nearest my heart. I mean
the battle of Vyázma, Pétya had been in a constant state of blissful
life in which he inevitably obeys laws laid down for him.
well-fed but not overfat horse that feels himself in harness and grows

having put off their departure till next morning, went to bed.
if you have firmly resolved to join our Brotherhood.” (Pierre nodded

“I have never enjoyed myself so much before!” she said, and Prince
procedure was discussed at those meetings, and how sedulously and
increased their pace. The near side horse, arching his head and breaking
to whom they were trying to get him engaged, he could never picture
“Leave him alone,” said Mary Hendríkhovna, smiling timidly and happily.

“Now I am all right,” she said, and asking the vicomte to begin, she
smile, “as it is not convenient in the presence of...?” He pointed to
month and without fighting a battle had dwindled to half their number,
term then also there could have been no war. Nor could there have been




says that this occurred because Kutúzov and Tormásov and Chichagóv, and
Englishman always knows what he should do and knows that all he does as


down. Anna Mikháylovna indicated by her attitude her consciousness of
“We know that you have Bonaparte and that he has beaten everybody in the
“You must do as you please,” said Prince Bolkónski, bowing to his
“Don’t you want to? Well, then, come here,” said she, and
corpulent, flaccid, and fat. But the bleached eyeball, the scar, and the

papers to be written to Vienna, to Berlin, and to Petersburg;

the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
Zakhár held back his horses and turned his face, which was already
skillfully made watch, dares to say that, as he does not understand

shouted, answering “Uncle’s” remark by this call to his borzoi.
He came to the point at once, treating her ceremoniously.
kindness!” He turned to go.
with the white mustache and red flushed face.
pacing up and down in front of the shed.
all—read.


me, but that he’ll marry Julie. You see how he’s been with her all
to be devastated by the Cossacks, the peasants in the steppe region
“Were you kept under lock and key? Who hindered his coming to the house?
her,” said the old count.
been unjust to the Austrians and especially to Weyrother. What
Paris, the ultimate goal, is reached. The Napoleonic government and army
cheerful smell of smoke.
he had ridden about two miles and had passed the last of the Russian
can’t be done.”
exaggeration quite contrary to Christian simplicity. Let us rather read
There was no answer to any of these questions, except one, and that
Suddenly the angry, squirrel-like expression of the princess’ pretty

Vítebsk with orders to advance at a trot along the road.
“The old men have met to talk over the business of the commune,” replied

“Natásha, I love you too much! More than anything in the world.”
about that, and secondly, if the Russian nobility had that right, the
was so close to him that his shortsighted eyes could not but perceive
creditors demanded from his father.
to subscribe all he had, but fearing that it might look like pride
him, immediately all submitted to him. But the Allied monarchs were
was rubbing his forehead and eyes with his hand. A short man was saying
anyone or taken anything that was not mine, but have only helped my
something was being torn inside her and she were dying. But the pain
Moving the money forward he prepared to deal. Rostóv sat down by his


handkerchiefs to their eyes, and just in front of them their eldest
“Gott, wie naiv!” * said he angrily, after he had gone a few steps.
in front with lanterns.
true you shall have a hundred gold pieces!”
“How is the prince?” she asked.
arm and only then was he able to relate what had happened to him.
place.
answered Ilágin indifferently, of the red-spotted bitch Erzá, for

“Yes, I shall be very glad to see him. Is he quite well?”
The sight of them reminded him of all he had experienced and learned

into sobs and ran from the room.
quite well known to everybody.
Natásha put one knee on the armchair, stooped over her mother, embraced
these orderly masses returned thence as disorganized and terrified mobs.
described by Crosart, a newly arrived Frenchman in a Spanish uniform.
“I want a great deal, Count! I want five hundred rubles,” and taking
yourself in it. And now, when one wants to smooth the thing over, some
worn-out, gloomy-faced bootmakers, wearing overalls and long tattered
Ostralitz. In the large drawing room which had become the commander
which was a lie, and worse than a lie? I am guilty and must endure...


But those tears were pleasant to them both.
went away. Natásha with a gay, coquettish smile talked to him, and
up and turning away as if from a shameful aspersion. “It is not from
soirees as before—such as she alone had the gift of arranging—at
shouting together came up from the slope. For a moment Denísov and the

cannot, disappoint them. But how will it be? I do not know, but it
a fragrance of perfume and wine, and had uttered the words “better late
friends went together to Prince Andrew’s door. Natásha opened it

ministers, parliaments, or newspapers be imagined? Is there any

by which the prince was to enter. Prince Andrew was looking at a large
not the outcome of cunning calculations, but of a feeling that lay in
would be reduced by three fourths, but he felt it must be done.

Rostóv spurred his horse, called to Sergeant Fédchenko and two other
He could not tell them what we say now: “Why fight, why block the road,
he has caused Moscow to perish,” said Rostopchín in a sharp, even voice,
“Now, my lad, we’ll go and get dwy,” he said to Pétya.
and everything was as it should be: only one thing disconcerted Prince
accord his good horse darted headlong downhill, leaping over gullies
“He asked you, and Vasíli Dmítrich * is also going.”
Prince Vasíli and other Petersburg acquaintances speaking of his wife’s
said Princess Mary.

losing more than five thousand killed and wounded after Tarútino and
and above all to himself, a secret of which he himself had been unaware.
Napoleon) only for the purpose of securing an armed peace, the

Emperor Francis would have been fulfilled long ago. I should long
Sónya?” cried Natásha with a happy yet frightened expression.
mistaken,” said the stranger in a deliberate and loud voice.
one and the same law (whether he observes the necessity of taking
come back! We’ve been into the French camp.”
crowd turned toward him and pressed round him. Those who stood nearest
crowd of tattered prisoners, buzzing with talk and wrapped and bandaged
I cannot agree with you about Pierre, whom I knew as a child. He always
the group round Mortemart to listen to what was being said there, and

at the ruins and did not recognize districts he had known well. Here and

four times—till I get what I want. I don’t mind what they think of
places. Then the strains of the count’s household band were replaced
“There are some like ourselves and some worse,” she thought.
listened, shaking his head disapprovingly. In the middle of the reading,
health of our Sovereign, the Emperor!” he roared, “Hurrah!” and

own house!”

“Only our holy brotherhood has the real meaning of life, all the rest

prompted by vanity and pettiness.
now taken possession of her—the life of a world of strenuous and free
Of all the affairs awaiting Pierre that day the sorting of Joseph
In consequence of this discovery his whole manner of life, all
many laws but no one to carry out the old ones. Nowadays everybody
the same manner.

follow, for this was clearly only a prelude.
but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world is
Pierre’s face, already pale, became distorted by fury. He seized Anatole
“We’ve stayed too long!” said the count with involuntary vexation. “The
and went out of the corridor.
me, now! I’ve got no strength left,” he added, with sudden resolution
stomach with an already stiffened arm flung wide.
to the effect that the Duc d’Enghien had gone secretly to Paris to

A man got up and came to see what this queer big fellow was laughing at
then....”
immediately.”
or religion. Under the influence of this feeling Sónya, whose life of
were moving in and out among the Russian troops and served as heralds
What would it have cost him to hold out for another two days? They would

them; they felt that it could not be otherwise. The most compassionate
drawing room. The guests began to disperse, some without taking leave
service, as often happens, turned in his favor. After the affair at
had driven the old prince to town returned bringing papers and letters
When the adjutant reminded him of the prisoner, he jerked his head in

to find seemliness, happiness, and peace in everything, and I should
fleeing crowd. A mounted general separated himself from the infantry and
“Are you ill?” he heard Dessalles’ voice asking.
place, and so on—as if anything more than A’s or B’s satisfaction
By the way the hunt approached and receded, by the cries of the dogs

Mokhaváya, or Kutáfyev Street, nor the Tróitsa Gate (places familiar in

and saw the dark figures of Russian prisoners round their campfires.
untrue and irrational, but contrary to all human reality. To the
“Well, it seems to be getting quieter,” remarked Ferapóntov, finishing

“Oh, don’t talk to me of my regiment,” replied Pierre, kissing his
him and smiled quietly.


behind him as if to take something. The members of his suite, guessing
him about the building looked angrily at Princess Mary and Dessalles and
domestic serfs begged permission to go to have a look at him. That
“One must admit,” continued Prince Andrew, “that Napoleon as a man

enclosure. They were howling there.” (This meant that the she-wolf,
go away.

The change that took place in Natásha at first surprised Princess Mary;
Anna Pávlovna disapproved.
back to Moscow. Anatole Kurágin’s father managed somehow to get his

to moan.

experienced the same feeling he had had on the eve of a battle, when
Bolkhovítinov told him everything and was then silent, awaiting
it to be alleged that he had been the first to leave the range of fire,
were Russians.
The Frenchman looked at his guilty face and smiled.
nothing for the house, and now you wish to throw away all our—all the

man of her own class, she glanced at him with her deep radiant look and
chiefly belonged, including, Pierre thought, Joseph Alexéevich himself,
The impression the princess made on Rostóv was a very agreeable one. To
And Prince Andrew after giving directions about his departure went to
and with the boot still on.
speaking, and with eager curiosity all the bootmakers joined the moving


retreat after a battle have lost it is what we say; and according to
his mother—and brother-in-law’s commissions, nor the dress material for
anxiety, and self-reproach for having let him go.
“The Cossacks have taken their boots. They were clearing the hut for the


was a very simple and agreeable business.
peaceful, and glorious fatherland, I should have proclaimed
from the drawing room.
“H-o-o-w are you standing? Where’s your leg? Your leg?” shouted

in practice.
they were meaningless.

from whatever point of view—theological, historical, ethical, or
to inflict severe punishment for the nonperformance of military duties
Every Russian might have predicted it, not by reasoning but by the
which sparks continually fall for several days. A town built of wood,
I thought quite differently. Had I said what I thought, I should have

curiosity. In three carriages involved among the munition carts, closely
accent. He was breathless with agitation, his face was red, and when
Hélène sat silently side by side almost at the bottom of the table, a
“Always the same thing,” said Pierre, looking round at his listeners.
command, and Barclay was unpopular; but from this confusion, division,

tormenting him without reaching a conclusion. He feared to give way to
CHAPTER XIX
a yawn. “Plenty of time,” he repeated.
was before?” Natásha rejoined with conviction. “The soul is
sunbeams. In front, beyond a hollow dale, could be seen the enemy’s
the man (a French officer) by the shoulder with one hand and by the
flight, and on that the whole strength of the French was concentrated.

Dólokhov smiled contemptuously and condescendingly when Anatole had
difficulty refraining from tears of vexation and irritation rather than
became confused in his speech and stopped in the middle of what he was
    * Death gives relief and death is peaceful.
Again on all the bright faces of the squadron the serious expression

Pétya soon came to himself, the color returned to his face, the pain had
voices were but feebly heard amid the uproar and one saw by their faces


When he had finished the Litany the deacon crossed the stole over his
his back she went downstairs.
who ten years before and a year later was considered an outlawed brigand
“Well, I am taking it off,” replied Lavrúshka’s voice.

eyes and indicating Hélène with a sorrowful gesture. “Ah, she is
invite me out and tell me all about myself.”
way heartily wished Natásha well. As she was leaving the Rostóvs she

advance on Moscow, nor did Alexander and the Russian commanders then

Makárin, a retired hussar, a kindly, weak fellow who had an unbounded

smile of his which seemed to say, “Ah! This is what I like!”
Anna Mikháylovna, in a few words, told her the contents of the letter,
Nesvítski stopped him and took him home.
zealous champion of old of our country’s weal, is offered to Your
their simple speech, mechanical to them but to her so full of deep
her bare arms and neck—suddenly affected her both agreeably and
was occupied by the interests of the center that was conducting
And the Emperor paused, with a frown.


was evident that nothing the general could say would surprise or even
who had not been seen in Moscow for a long time, attracted general
pwovisions to feed his soldiers, but by him who takes them to fill his
not be given up—and thereby ruined?” “To preserve the tranquillity
rose to his mind, and going over the pictures of that love in his
arrived from Russia. With this object he intended to meet the regiment;
as they had been—the one seven and the other five years before. At Anna
that have induced you to take this melancholy decision.

more cunning or subtle diplomatist—you know, a combination of French
orderlies. Much of it true. But when Napoleon asked him whether the
presented to him in the form of his love for Natásha, and a last, though

A shell tore up the earth two paces from Pierre and he looked around
the house, Nicholas no longer considered it necessary to show his manly

stood at the back, and, though he had heard hardly anything, understood
“No. What did you say? Go on, go on.”
to take such provisions as remained at Boguchárovo before the French



leonine head. This head, with its remarkably broad brow and cheekbones,
“But we must give him an answer.”
that, Nicholas had told his wife all that had passed between himself and
been told that Anatole was married, with some arsenic she had stealthily
The doctor tried to stop her. She pushed him aside and ran to her
hear?”
suddenly appeared in the fog, there was a flash, followed by a report,
anything he wished to hear. Some discussed the position that had been

Vasíli’s son Anatole, whom they wish to reform by marrying him to
“It’s ready, your honor; you can split a Frenchman in half with it!”
regime had weakened and a patriotic and anti-French tendency prevailed
In the one case as in the other, on both sides the struggle provokes


pillows. He was thin and pale. In one thin, translucently white hand
anyone like her!” said he, offering Nicholas a pipe with a long stem
“I have found out everything, your excellency: the Rostóvs are staying

paced up and down the room, repeating to Balashëv almost the very words

her.
“Well begin!” said Dólokhov.

and because many complaints were made against the troops, who, taking
Berg, the Rostóvs’ son-in-law, was already a colonel wearing the orders
needed further proofs and it was necessary to wait.
Petersburg on the tenth of August, and her son, who had remained in
understand it all less than you do.”
roof glittered with dew, to the right was a leafy tree with brilliantly
from under the roofs of the houses. He met more people in the streets
under her curls and boisterous, childish laughter, as he had known her
alone took no part in the conversation which again became general. The

it was evident that he performed his duty as a subordinate with even
evidently unable to repress his vexation, after the princess’ carriage
thought turned to her sister-in-law with a tender glance at her figure.

right or wrong to remarry while one had a husband living they did not
Having entered his study Pierre closed the door and addressed Anatole
widespread everywhere. The cook’s moans had now subsided. On two sides

Nicholas, though free from Denísov’s readiness to find fault with
“But as you are a philosopher, be a consistent one, look at the other
the vice-King’s division will open a heavy fire on seeing the attack

princess, and stared fixedly at her through his eyeglass.
dissatisfaction the agitation and fear he had betrayed before his
constitution. A municipality was established and the following
I don’t know how to put it. Without you, or when something comes between
to come out, even into the light of heaven again.”
special estrangement from the members of her own family. All of
letter.
called everyone without exception and without the slightest variation

“Come inside, your honor!” repeated the tradesman, bowing.
French overcoat.
that occupied him. Evidently these girls passionately desired one
on—that Pierre became quite bewildered and only replied:
time, who would have felt very much ashamed had she not been assured

(3) However much the difficulty of understanding the causes may be
“He ought to have acted in this way and in that way. In this case he did
the back rooms where a cork and various dressing gowns and male garments

will as it had seemed to him—he had been no more free than now when they
would meet.

“It seems that even in the next world only the gentry are to have a
of nothing.
the best post he could—preferably that of adjutant to some important
o’clock were stationed inactive behind Semënovsk, under heavy artillery
don’t know. That is all one can say about her.”
are sorry for you, but we’re not willing. Go away yourself, alone...”

about such a base thing as money, and because their youth was over....
father’s irritability, which was always directed against her and had

never bear malice or enmity toward thy brother. Be kindly and courteous.
soiree.

the events, and who always combine in such a way that those taking
maidservant ran into the hall and hurriedly said something, mentioning
Kutúzov was left with only his own weak and exhausted forces. The
and then a cracking sound and the ring of something heavy falling close
transparent air in most delicate outline and with unnatural clearness.
traces broke, and lungs were strained with shouting. The officers
white muslin, she returned home after communion, for the first time for
The prisoners were placed in a certain order, according to the list
Balashëv’s face, which was animated by the beauty of the morning and

She felt that it was impossible to ask, or to answer, in words.
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with
The French guns were hastily reloaded. The infantry in their blue

Napoleon who said it. He heard the speaker addressed as Sire. But he
“Why, we’ve not done any harm! We did it just out of foolishness. It’s
“I won’t tell anyone!” and she ran off at once to Sónya.
“What?” asked Countess Mary, surprised.

    CHAPTER XV
senseless and its attainment quite impossible.
afraid to speak out.
The Rhetor cleared his throat, crossed his gloved hands on his breast,
have stayed longer.”
But Sónya? And his plighted word? That was why Rostóv grew angry when he




streets. The gates and shops were all closed, only here and there round
Tíkhon, understanding him, wiped away the tears.


full of well-being and prosperity for all. The European system was
horrified by her spiritual baseness and trying to arrange her thoughts
had no connection with the matter in hand. His haggard face was yellow.
backwards and forwards and was at last brought to the doors of the


rural joys and peace such as he had never known before, and which now
Pierre dined at the club that day and heard on all sides gossip about

can be done?”
reluctantly, but gradually with more and more animation, and from habit
to swim the river with his Uhlans instead of seeking a ford. In evident
of the crowd. Like the seventh and last wave that shatters a ship, that
Denísov’s horse swerved aside to avoid a pool in the track and bumped
on the top of her head (a style that quite altered and spoiled her
place was taken by a new and necessary performer.
promotion.

more and holding out the letter.
Countess Mary sat at the other end of the table. When her husband took
When Natásha opened Prince Andrew’s door with a familiar movement and
and suddenly determines to speak out.

frightened by what he had done.
received him graciously, and promised to inform the Emperor. A few
they could be seen running back past it carrying their wounded on
men’s will.
toward the ryefield and away from Nicholas.

night I looked at the campfires and there was no end of them. A regular
were ill at ease and Prince Andrew felt that he was a visitor for whose
ran, and bowed to the ground.
particularly startling after a month of unfulfilled expectations, and at

Highness a matter of great importance for their country’s welfare.
When the eager but misrepeated words had reached their destination in
Gulf of Bothnia to the mouths of the Danube. Catherine the Great could
cowshed nor Rostóv back with his platoon from foraging for hay had any
Pierre began describing what he had done on his estates, trying as far
princesses was coming to take her turn at watching. “Let us go.”
his eyes, looked down at the shirt and examined the seams.
Cross.... I can’t make it out at all.”

with it to the marshals, and ordered the action to begin. The marshals,
orders, to go against the French, and they shouted something about
with an apoplectic flush over neck and nape as old people do.
said the old soldier dismally to a comrade, “you’ll forget to
“Separate? Very well, but only if you give me a fortune,” said
bitterly that in spite of repeated orders, the soldiers continue to
Princess Mary could not lift her head, she was weeping.
what a plight our Anatole...”
that in the depth of his soul he was glad she was remaining at home and
mental effort has been applied in this direction by historians as has
visitors and arranged about refreshments for the gentry and the serfs,



a dream? Isn’t Princess Mary mistaken? Am I not too conceited and
eyes; then she suddenly asked herself to whom she was saying this.
ruin Russia.”
attracted Prince Andrew.
halted, the Austrian argued that not he, but the higher command, was to


corporal’s face when the drums were beating.
the old man, and showed Pierre a globe. This globe was alive—a vibrating
‘Fool!’ He was greatly depressed. From behind the door I heard how he
He keeps it all within him. Today he is cheerful and in good spirits,
“Dear-est!” she repeated again.
disclosed the fresh gap between his teeth to which Prince Andrew could

voice:


their adjutants had come to witness the curious phenomenon of the
“Stop those wretches!” gasped Kutúzov to the regimental commander,

members of the council of war. They were drinking tea, and only awaited
several gatherings of which she was usually the ornament, and was said
and his excitement. At the same moment Natásha, without drawing
caused him to moan (he had dysentery) as his fear and grief at being
metallic roar, and a whistling grenade flew above the heads of our
never take it off. Do you promise?”
Godfreys and the Minnesingers has remained the history of Godfreys
feet.



the panorama seemed carved in some precious stone of a yellowish-green
went to his own room.

Ivánovich (who always went into a corner to blow his nose on his
the priest with a goose feather anointed the boy’s little red and

him pleasant and easy during that first part of his stay in Vorónezh
anyone, and so you don’t deserve to have them.”
“Oh! And my coachman has gone.”
some voice was repeating. “We must harness, it is time to harness....”
Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed
sidled out of the room.
that they can possibly disobey. Having wrung a submissive “I understand”
it escape from his handsome mouth in rings. This was Lieutenant Berg, an
the saints. “I’d pray awhile to one, ponder awhile, then go on to

what was demanded and looked round as if asking whether there was
CHAPTER IV
mentioned that Prince Andrew was among the wounded traveling with them;
its singers. Coming up toward him was a train of carts carrying men who
at an officer who was entering the house the Emperor occupied. “After
of things to him in the very worst light, pointing out the necessity of
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be
Pierre sat between his wife and the old countess. He spoke of what he

infantry, cavalry, and artillery. How was it that two guns were

luxury, and governmental and religious institutions. These forms were
and in a whisper, with a strangely unsmiling face: “Come to dinner

young, bright, adroit, and resolute. He ran round to the other side of
exactly?” said Pierre.
the world; and for the French its immediate result was that they were
Márya Dmítrievna is with her and she too asks you to come.”
other Russians who gazed at the French with fear and curiosity, paid no
After dinner they went to drink coffee in Napoleon’s study, which four
“Loot everything, lads! Don’t let those devils get it!” he cried, taking
solution of the whole problem.
“Who’s that running on the middle of the bridge? To the right! Come
by, tried to make a joke, saying that Kutúzov had evidently failed to
hands for a quarter of an hour, Princess, I’ll drive round to see Anna
of the boulevards whom he visited of an evening. He led the mazurka
“Looting continues in the city despite the decrees against it. Order
in separate piles, began counting them.
and cheerful.
he would have been mentioned among the officers found on the field of
Passing by Kutúzov’s carriage and the exhausted saddle horses of
holding Natásha’s hair.

At that moment Zhilínski’s voice was heard calling Borís.
Forgetting his intention of concealing his knowledge of French, Pierre,
A military organization may be quite correctly compared to a cone, of
horror that no barrier lay between him and her.
to her husband. “I have just been told that nothing is ready yet.
him which he rested on the back of a happy page who had run up to him,


The Comte de Turenne showed him into a big reception room where many
himself and Alexander.) “From the height of the Krémlin—yes, there
him to endure his position.
if she had not meant it seriously. It makes it as if you were marrying
did not, and do not, in the least care about that scoundrel of a clerk

“But where was she left?” asked Pierre.
landowner’s house. Having ridden in, he dismounted and approached a
is everything, everything in her,” continued this man. “She is
as not to wake the countess who had fallen asleep only toward morning,
and his kind, intelligent face rather pale, rushed out of the shed
do not suppose me to be so bad. With my whole soul I wish to be what you
thrown back. His whole short corpulent figure with broad thick

face close to her mother’s, “I am sorry, forgive me, I’ll never do it

“Oh, that count of yours!” said the princess malevolently. “He is a
the opposition of her mother, the doctors, and even of her husband
entanglements of life, he was living so calmly and quietly. He felt that
in me, but I and Russia have a right to expect from you all the zeal,
possible sign a receipt for such and such stores received. If not, as

was already in ear but had been completely trodden down by cattle and

Natásha was sad and irritable all that time, especially when her mother,
“Allow me to ask,” he said, “are you a Mason?”
thought the officers were beginning to look at him and Dólokhov with
of cruelty, as when tying the policeman to the bear and dropping them
been inherited by his son, whose guardian he was.
only then that what is new and good begins. While there is life there is
windows at a small table laid with hors-d’oeuvres. Speránski, wearing

who were loading, hauling the guns, and continually running past
to one another, and the old servant who was holding the count’s hand
general movement; that something was constantly expected of him, that if
corpses, and the French soldiers, after dispatching the wounded, threw
and paid the eldest daughter, Countess Véra, the attentions a young man
“You have no idea how unhappy, how lonely, I feel when you are like
in me. I have been told that her brother Anatole was in love with her
therefore met with unaltered looks the angrily inquisitive expression of
boldly and lightly made plans for an extended future, said he could not
But Borís noticed that he was preparing to make fun of Berg, and
sufficient cause for war; that Kurákin had acted on his own initiative
The doctor cast a rapid glance upwards and silently shrugged his
says we ought not to think. But I can’t help it. Besides, when I was in
it can’t be a square—for they are not drawn up for that.”
among his generals and marshals at the rear of his suite. Those sent to

near by the news spread that the Emperor was unwell. He ate nothing and
leaves were motionless, and lilac-colored flowers and the first blades




After that a long-frocked abbé was brought to her. She confessed to
hundred and thirty thousand men this side of the Vistula. The Turks will

Pierre felt that he was the center of it all, and this both pleased and
matter-of-fact man which showed him what he ought to do.
green. It was dusty and so hot that on passing near water one longed to
that exists) is subject. But regarding him from within ourselves as what

brightened into a happy, grateful, childlike smile.
Prince Vasíli said no more and his cheeks began to twitch nervously,
“Indeed? Yes, yes!” said Borís, with a smile. “And we too have
that old man—in whom there seemed to remain only the habit of passions,

cross by ferry. While the carriage and horses were being placed on it,
his superiors by his promptitude and accuracy and had arranged his money
“Ah, my dear fellow!” rejoined Karatáev, “never decline a prison or a
to disperse among the wealthy and deserted houses, the army was lost
and more regularly and rapidly, and the action at the Goldbach Stream
the same pettiness, worldliness, and senselessness. Now, however, he
“Do you want to be doing the same?” said an old soldier, turning
Rostóv was displeased to see that the company consisted almost entirely
horses should be sent there. This could not all be arranged that day,
were now any difficulties the whole fault lay in the fact that his plan

and carry her to the sleigh.”
The princess understood what Natásha had meant by the words: “two days
beside the fence. And even that ruined and befouled house—which in dull
found the count with it in his hand, sobbing and laughing at the same

traitors,” he added, with a look of gloomy dignity and a fine energetic
count, and having kissed his wife’s hand he went back to his study.
Princess Mary was sitting helpless and bewildered in the large sitting
hour, was over, Rostóv said nothing, and he spent the rest of the day
been avoiding Natásha because it seemed to him that his feeling for her
contrary, I can supply you with everything even if you want to give
Bear up; it won’t be for long now! We’ll see our visitors off and then
matter.
punishment that overtakes men for their sins, and especially of her own
lips and eyes into a cluster of wrinkles. He ceased speaking and bowed
Soon after his admission to the Masonic Brotherhood, Pierre went to the
it was so dark in the forest... and he had such kind... No, I can’t
guns.
to its neck in a table napkin and poured out wine for himself and for
Sokólniki forest and found Dólokhov, Denísov, and Rostóv already
pistol, and took aim.

“Was that grapeshot?” he asked Denísov.
of the essence of life.
a reputation for bravery, and there was something he could not at all
serious expression. But the author himself took the verses and began
persons is merely a paraphrase—a restatement of the question in other
“Are we really quite lost, your excellency?” he asked again.
Pierre’s one feeling at the moment was a desire to show that he was

building up the temple of Solomon have tried to destroy the temple of
their context. Every word and action of his was the manifestation of
is very delicate. Don’t tell Natásha. And don’t attach importance
now his plump hairy chest to the brush with which his valet was rubbing
“Ah! He is alive,” said Napoleon. “Lift this young man up and
chosen, criticizing not the position itself so much as the mental
into the distance, at the waters of the Danube, at the sky, and at the



“Can he really be going away leaving me alone without having told me


done for him! I hope that here in Moscow no one will receive him, in
contrary, he is probably pursuing you with detachments, or at most with

clearly for the first time that the French would enter Moscow. The

And why do they all speak of a ‘military genius’? Is a man a genius who
stir. An adjutant, dismounting, lifted the soldier under the arms to

wings, hoping before evening and before the arrival of the Emperor to

middle of his talk and gazing intently with his laughing, kindly eyes.
kind. He neither saw nor understood anything of the sort. He only saw in
voice.

a month ago,” Prince Andrew was saying, “and by those who were unable to
“Yes, yes, it really was pink!” cried Natásha, who now thought she


in his own soul, and in God, had been destroyed. He had experienced this
went on severely, as though there were something wrong about it which
plundering by the Russians, with which the reoccupation of the city

something, but when Pierre entered he stopped speaking and went out.
past.
he uttered.
brain suddenly began to work with a vigor, clearness, and depth it had
especially as the smoke mingling with the mist hid the whole locality.
them. Still slapping his pockets, he kissed the hand of the countess
sister had embraced him, and tears of joy choked him so that he could
has, Nicholas! I am horrid sometimes, but I was ashamed to be happy
disappeared into the skirt of the wood. At the same instant, with a cry
understanding of his employer’s happiness.
unattractive.
was on this that the Cossacks all busied themselves.
desire to do good to his neighbor.
laughed softly with a hissing chuckle, and Speránski in a high-pitched

the shop. She had taken a cab and driven home by a side street and the

regiment and, when given an order, to do what was clearly, distinctly,
and soldiers of the French army knew it could not be done, because the

“Sónya, is it well with thee?” he asked from time to time.
generals pretending to confer together expressed various opinions, all
Prince Andrew smiled involuntarily as he looked at the artillery officer
Thine almighty hand, and give him victory over his enemy, even as Thou
Berg put on the cleanest of coats, without a spot or speck of dust,
“Lázarev!” the colonel called, with a frown, and Lázarev, the

it’s definite and one is rid of the old tormenting doubt.” Pierre
Since their marriage Natásha and her husband had lived in Moscow, in


into her box for the rest of the performance, and Natásha moved over to
treading heavily he stepped down from the carriage just as if those two
voice. To fresh questions as to the firmness of his resolution Pierre
daughter and placing an arm on the back of the chair on which she sat,
playing a Viennese waltz on the clavichord, while a fourth, lying on
the bonfire, and addressing Túshin asked him to have the guns moved a
vice versa.
camp at Drissa; the second army was retreating, trying to effect a
I was right. Without boasting, you know, I may say that I know the Army
“But why this secrecy? Why doesn’t he come to the house?” asked
smiling happily.



this enemy of decisive action, gave battle at Borodinó, investing the
a Persian costume, had now the appearance of a most correct officer of
peace.”
of England and expended on no other undertaking so much time and effort,

And that’s how it is with me. À demain, mon cher.” *
the presence of a monarch, talked with extreme familiarity of the

asked him into the room that had been assigned him. A bed had been made
“He has betrayed his Tsar and his country, he has gone over to
that rigid position.
Two governesses were sitting with the Vogels at a table, on which were

“But what do they want?” he asked the superintendent of police.

Ukraine excellent horses which pleased him and earned him commendation


Tsar, who still remained in the same attitude of indecision.

“Drain the blood from men’s veins and put in water instead, then
oppressed and ashamed in court society, and dark thoughts of the vanity
sorry that she was being wasted all this time and of no use to
appeared that they had worn when under fire. Rostóv watched his enemy,
of the Russian war, “half were Austrians, Prussians, Saxons, Poles,
the officer who wished to go into action to distinguish himself; nor
“Your Majesty is too kind!” replied de Beausset to the invitation to
They rose from the table and sat down in the entrance porch which served
presence gave her no pleasure was here and they met every week. Like the
He was joyfully planning this new life, when Prince Vasíli suddenly
importance and that no time must be lost. He did not consider or ask
than once remarked: “We regard everything that is above the common
    FIRST EPILOGUE: 1813 - 20
to where the horses stood saddled.
his rider’s knee against a tree.
“You need not have said that to me, Father,” said the son with a
silent. The glow spread, rising and falling, farther and farther still.
required, interrupted his wife’s remarks and touched on the question
the hand nor a single muscle of the count’s face stirred. Once more
and not to admit anyone who was not on that list? Then why was that
The ranks of the infantry disappeared amid the smoke but their

“Do order them to form into battalion columns and go round the

face linked itself up with Kutúzov’s remembrance of his personality.
Vasíli to himself, with a sorrowful sigh, one morning, feeling that
French soldiers were running past him.
genius of the commanders. But the assignment of these various meanings
“Will they bring our horses or not?” thought Pétya, instinctively
After tea, the company went into the sitting room and Princess Mary was
When the reading of Denísov’s virulent reply, which took more than an
“No, it’s a sprain.”
was particularly tender to and considerate of him from a wish to

the copse across which our men, regardless of orders, were running and
with such exactitude that Nesvítski could not help laughing. Kutúzov
The young officer standing in the gateway, as if hesitating whether to
recollection of his dispute with his brother-in-law was unpleasant and
future sister-in-law. ‘Husbands’ sisters bring up blisters,’

it might really have been so? Could one possibly make out amid all that
“Oh yes, another thing! Please, my dear fellow, will you sharpen my
highest rewards.
happy look of resignation to the will of God on her face. Their box was
Dark hairs were already showing on his upper lip, and his whole face
Pointing to the French troops, Denísov asked him what these and those
“Oh, well, you know people often invent things. I only say what I
O God, why isn’t he here?” Natásha quieted herself for a moment,
across and along them a network of shadows from the bare old lime trees
“Well, I am like any other dog as long as it’s not a question of
her with consolation, and she told herself that he was only shy from
studied for a long time.
directs nor increases its movement foams ahead of it, and at a distance
“Go away...” exclaimed Napoleon suddenly and morosely, and turned aside.
Bolkónski took the opportunity to go in to get some details of the
light must I appear to them!” thought he, thinking of his troops.
for half an hour repeating the same words to the various arrivals,
till the whole invasion had perished.
The Emperor said a few words to him and took a step toward his horse.
relation between those who command and those who execute, we find that
from headquarters behind the village to the left, and thither Rostóv
“Yes, sir, and there’s a light in your father’s study.”
occupied. The German who knew little French, answered the two first
shed with Pierre, was dying, and Pierre told the corporal that something
why, the recollection came to his mind of a summer evening he had spent
I promise you I will see to it that there you shall want for nothing.
we’ll go!”
which Denísov, without alluding to the offenses of the commissariat
her companions’ not having the least conception that it could be
a power, and therefore before speaking about Napoleons, Louis-es, and
“Commander of the third company wanted by the general!... commander to
year’s harvest, Nicholas pointed to the red-spotted bitch.
master—may the kingdom of heaven be his—has remained here, but he is in
tranquil look on his handsome, plump, white face. It was one of the
the Emperor spoke to him most graciously. Annette and I were speaking of
they both tried to listen to the stern and dreadful choir that still

position at Borodinó.
position among the Petersburg Freemasons. He arranged dining and funeral
the combs, and the short home bees, shriveled and listless as if they


“Now, Véra, what does it matter to you?” said Natásha in defense,
A system of some sort was killing him—Pierre—depriving him of life, of
slightly sarcastic smile. “I am Borís, son of Princess Anna
of cowardice in the other. Both passed the examination successfully. As
mind at that time was: who was it that had really sentenced him to
its problem.
Prince Andrew glanced at Timókhin, who looked at his commander in alarm
air, and disobeying orders. The moral hesitation which decided the fate
head of the movement grows with the increased size of the group. During
back, chest, shoulders, and even his arms, which he held as if ever
be taken, but the command of the armies became still more confused and
Her husband’s account of the boy’s agitation while Pierre was speaking

innumerable lights. Police were stationed at the brightly lit entrance
the windows of the streets through which he rode, rugs, flags, and his

When Balashëv had ended, Napoleon again took out his snuffbox, sniffed

“You know,” said the princess in the same tone of voice and still in
But modern history cannot give that reply. Science does not admit the




just so,” she added.
remarkable resemblance to the preceding movement from west to east.
“My mother! My mother, my angel, my adored angel mother,” and

stinging reproaches he meant to address to Kutúzov for his deception. He
Dólokhov’s offer,” he said, articulating his friend’s name with
“Oh, please!” said he. “I understand your reasons. You are an officer...
line; and the Austrian troops. But they all stood in the same lines,
hanging his head, meekly followed her.
considerations: to maintain tranquillity in Moscow and expedite the
to dress in here; and that Andrew had quite changed, and that Kitty
displease the court besides. (You know there is some kind of
A little man in Russian civilian clothes rode out from the ranks, and
more than thirty miles in a day—everybody pointed laughingly at Tíkhon.
why he did not reply to what she chiefly wanted to know: how was her
deepest reflections to say a civil word to someone who comes in and can

of states and nations increases or decreases.
“Please step into the gallery, your excellency,” said the major-domo.
And Prince Vasíli repeated the words supposed to have been spoken by
Her voice broke, tears gushed from her eyes, and she turned quickly to
“Who gave the report?” inquired Shcherbínin, taking the envelope.
he had no mother.
joyful, and amused smile now habitual to him, was interested in this
open, the padlocks smashed, the books mutilated, and other disorders
acquaintance Count Willarski, who had introduced him to the lodge in
regimental commander, overtaking the third company on its way to its

generals had taken their stand, but even from the flèches themselves—in


suffering of a soul burdened by the body appeared on her face. Nicholas
Sónya slammed the door to. A minute later they let the count in. He was
possible must join hands as closely as they can to withstand the general
his room.
charged Murat to find Kutúzov. Then he gave careful directions about the
blue cap behind him on the crupper of his horse. The boy held on to the

and a Moscow burgher called Karpúshka Chigírin, “who—having been a
(He remembered that in French there is some peculiar way of addressing a
“How is he now? Confused? Angry? Ought I to put it right?” she
the Sushchévski or the Rogózhski quarter.”
In Petersburg she had enjoyed the special protection of a grandee who
turning to Natásha.
be superseded by Bennigsen all will be lost, for Bennigsen showed his
and drops....”
a gully that lay in her path. She was an old animal with a gray back and


rosy, with a dark little mustache, evidently rested and made sleeker by

as a soldier after the duel with Dólokhov.” And the memory of the dinner
summertime mingled with memories of bathing and of the liquid, vibrating
the Emperor’s voice.
distance, though the collision had deprived it of all its force.
freedom which he experienced only during those weeks.
the time had not deceived her—that that state of freedom and readiness
thought of such a thing, it is only the cabinet that says it.”
her, but in her presence he felt quite at ease, and said not at all what
officers. Prince Andrew lay on his chest with his face in the grass,

the officers or adjutants who wandered about in the fog in those unknown
deceased that they had immediately let the matter drop.
Through the study door came the sound of slippered feet and the cry:
dealer in the town and a landowner fourteen miles out of town who had

gavest Moses the victory over Amalek, Gideon over Midian, and David over
his third cup of tea and getting up. “Ours must have got the best of it.
The flood of nations begins to subside into its normal channels. The
“Princesse, au revoir,” cried he, stumbling with his tongue as well
the sale of the land and forests and to release them from the Land Bank,

Someone mentioned that Captain Túshin was bivouacking close to the

    CHAPTER XXI
“But if he is dishonorable?”
looking at them, turned to an adjutant to ask him for a field glass.
which swarmed a crowd of Frenchmen. At first Pierre did not realize
was saying. “Have you seen Lázarev?”

definition of power needs explanation.
be clearly seen glittering as though freshly varnished. Down below,
continually, bringing visitors to the Countess Rostóva’s big house on
all, people do go in.... It’s all nonsense! I’ll go in and hand
plain occupied by the Prince d’Eckmühl will open fire on the opposing

suddenly transformed. He put on the air of a subordinate who obeys
Pierre was no longer able to turn away and close his eyes. His curiosity
wife, how she would love him become quite different, and how all he had
it that we are staying on?”
beloved and intimate human being that is dying, besides this horror at
Moscow based in 1812? What reason was there for assuming any probability

went to the carriage.

and he was horrified at the thought of the order he had to issue. But
antechamber experienced the same feeling of respect and even fear when
to drag their legs went to the front rather than to the hospitals.
“Wait!” cried Dólokhov, hammering with the bottle on the window
wretched appearance. Most of them were disfigured by frost-bitten noses


Having read thus far, Princess Mary sighed and glanced into the mirror
easy to be an interesting man (I am an interesting man now); people
From the day his wife arrived in Moscow Pierre had been intending to go

before, but never so strongly as now. When similar doubts had assailed
said at Tilsit.”
modesty, and only desired and insisted that their adored sovereign
of life. And that other side of life, of which she had never before
quartermaster for the money.”
fighting hussar who had been under fire.
us in verse and prose, but of Dokhtúrov scarcely a word has been said.
on the farther side and wait. But before that order was given—almost

his own had taken possession of his brain and at that moment afforded
shaggy caps on their heads, and an escort of hussars and Uhlans and a
looked straight at his adjutant’s face without recognizing him.
along and imagining that we are going home, but that heaven knows

Nicholas’ letter was read over hundreds of times, and those who were


the duel with Nesvítski, Bezúkhov’s second. Pierre went home, but

and of course not as ‘Emperor,’ it seemed to me it should be to
works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and
Alpátych did not insist further. He had managed people for a long time
that one’s companion is the only man besides oneself capable of
Armfeldt addressed Pfuel in German. Toll explained to Volkónski in
contemptible because their aim was the welfare of himself and his
stood frowning and rubbing his face with his hand.

The hounds were joined into one pack, and “Uncle” and Nicholas rode
upon him, passed splendidly, lifting his feet with a high and graceful
would content himself with that hint.
or enlightenment of citizens of France or some other country. But not
of the sleigh.

Frenchman in the frieze gown who meanwhile, swaying slowly from side to
thing—to carry away and eat those green plums without being caught—and

who Rostóv wanted. “Here, here,” and Túshin led him into the next
wishing to take it off, but let it drop again. The five minutes spent

man less and go on exchanging, I shall certainly lose, and therefore
his mind devised reasons why he should be mentally tranquil too. The
let themselves be tricked at the crossing of the Vienna bridge, you are
aloft, and again repeated his long-drawn cry, “A-tu!” (This call and
by the candlelight and was evidently struck by the troubled expression
adapting her in his imagination to all the conditions of married life:

Or in other words, the conception of a cause is inapplicable to the

people! Poor dear, he’s as white as a sheet!”—various voices were heard
Telyánin, and he went out to give the order.
    CHAPTER IX


that year to Moreau to enter the Russian service.... “Wonderful!...
shoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by something extraordinary
“A battle is won by those who firmly resolve to win it! Why did we lose
“Your honor, I thought...”
it.
packet wrapped in paper. He did it all silently and very quickly. He
in a semicircle. The crowd consisted of a few Russians and many

the business of packing was received skeptically. Everybody expected
and completeness amid the conditions of court life and far from the
a first introduction and betrays a consciousness of the impropriety of
leave his corner, come to her, pull her wet hands from her face, and
danger, and who was neither an educated man nor a courtier, was able to

After a few words to Pierre about the awful roads from the Polish
“That one? Yes, she’s a good dog, gets what she’s after,”
received by the Emperor. Had you heard?”


a very gloomy frame of mind in a royal study in the Krémlin, giving
and arouse his energy, and Barclay, feeling less free than ever under

you.”
Kutúzov fell back toward Vienna, destroying behind him the bridges over
all his property, not to us his direct heirs, but to Pierre.”

possessed. Pierre was one of those who are only strong when they feel
to irresistible, youthful, childish drowsiness. “But what was I
knew might interest the old lady and that she could understand. He
her about so!”

power that moves peoples? To this, modern history laboriously replies
“Three and a half miles, Your Majesty.”

French, there would be great hope of saving the army; to let the


quite remember how, but don’t you remember that it could all be

know that there is going to be a battle tomorrow?”
even remember how formerly, on the strength of similar wretched logical

ready to go all lengths and was prepared to sacrifice everything. He now
Her love for Rostóv no longer tormented or agitated her. It filled her
seek nothing, be not anxious or envious. Man’s future and thy own fate
it is. You must know. We will take it at once and show it to the
At Dorogobúzh while the soldiers of the convoy, after locking the
a small trap straight to a spot reserved for him.
the regiment I’d... Ah well, I’ll show that in action, and for me

guilty of anything, he added, taking Pierre’s hand in a friendly manner,
high, that he might not be unworthy even of such company.

Running into Sónya’s room and not finding her there, Natásha ran to
    CHAPTER VII

“Say what you like.... She is like a sister to me, and I can’t tell
At that moment Pierre involuntarily betrayed to her, to Princess Mary,

an officer who struck Prince Andrew by his humiliated and frightened air
it were falling and he dozed off. Dinner was brought him.
be in! Kutúzov was a traitor, and Prince Vasíli during the visits of
“Moscow has nothing else to do but gossip,” Borís went on.

animal looked around him with glittering eyes.
What is wanted is not some Barclay or other, but a man like Bennigsen,
a problem that has already been proved. Wolzogen took his place and
“Will you bet? The ribbon of the order is a different matter....”
hospitals could no longer accommodate all the sick and wounded, yet the
the mud off his face with his sleeve. “Perched up there, you’re more
them in the thick fog, the Russians exchanged shots with the enemy
whereas it was perhaps not known, since the enemy was in movement.
lackeys who care nothing for their master’s business. Quarante mille
“Rostóv!”

Pétya! Good man!” cried he, addressing Pierre.
    CHAPTER XXXIX

cursed the day before and will curse again a month later.
“I shall always remember that in this world one must expect no reward,
pick up the glove himself and to pass round the doctors who were not

on the new dresses. Just as she had put on a bodice without sleeves and
administration was devoutly preserved among the serfs. “He was a


in the deathlike stillness of the study, calm and significant memories
regiment, devoted himself entirely to the pleasures and interests of
    CHAPTER X
replies of a man who, watching the movements of a herd of cattle and



“Postulant,” to the accompaniment of various knockings with
for life, but I don’t understand that, I forget quickly.”
such a fright! Oh, what a pig I am!” he repeated, flushing suddenly.


not make out whether the tea was strong or weak, and the samovar held
curious embarrassment among some of those present. Sónya, Dólokhov,

Suddenly a gust of wind beat violently against the casement of the
first division of the Second Army.
prisoners taken in yesterday’s action, was standing by the door after


“Well, how are you?” he asked.
all these dreams melted and merged into the chaos and darkness of


that meet the beekeeper are not the same. To the beekeeper’s tap on the
CHAPTER XXIX
another who wished to get away. With his head bent, and his big feet
was a traitor and a spy. I could not let him go unpunished and so I have
from the very day you first came to Otrádnoe I have loved you,” she
intelligent, how is it you don’t see that if the count has written a

“And I’ll go to my ruin, I will, as soon as possible! It’s not

have come to it,” said he.
comme il faut, that’s a different matter; but the Kurágins’ set of
BOOK NINE: 1812
“Now, Nicholas,” she added, turning to her husband, “I can’t understand
that life is not over for him. But together with this mental change
Natásha was evidently dismayed at the thought of what he might think she
“That’s for Belóva? Excellent!” She felt the quality of the material.
The soldier said no more and the talk went on.
Pierre had none of the practical persistence that would have enabled him
were but a given amount of animation between them and as the wife’s
already known in Moscow and that the ladies about his father—who were

“Zum Henker diese Russen!” * muttered a German.

The time for Prince Andrew’s return and marriage was approaching, but
pacing angrily about and snorting. The old prince felt as though he
everything conventional, artificial, and human—for everything the
saber them... Whom? The hussars... Ah, the hussars with mustaches. Along
Hélène nor she at him. But she was just as terribly close to him. He
of dogs. Only the delighted “Uncle” dismounted, and cut off a pad,
the retreat but of losing in that retreat all I held dear—not to mention

they think that this maneuver was calculated to save Russia and destroy
began to wail like a baby without knowing why, except that Sónya was
Boguchárovo for him. I should be given a small room as a favor, the
all-important.”
speak of him to the Emperor, but above all from a certain desperation
souls of the worshipers. The gates of the sanctuary screen were closed,
of a girl, but I like her.”
the Frenchman Langeron, Kutúzov’s incapacity, and (it was whispered)
or because of those memories of a childhood that could not return, or
seen, as the military scientists might convince themselves by the
the circle of her contemporaries and had once been a real, living, and
in relation to everything coexisting with him. This is what makes it

count coming out from the dining hall into the anteroom, and he added:
“Don’t speak to me of that! What can I do?” said he. “I tell
that had advanced beyond the village went back; but as though in revenge
they don’t help at all. What can doctors cure? One can’t cure anything.
had sinned against God. One told how he had taken a life, another had
“The one in pink is mine, so keep off!” said Ilyín on seeing Dunyásha
strange. She looked about with pleasure, smiling joyfully.
ne vous fera pas de mal,” * he added shyly and affectionately, touching

would not hold out even for fourteen hours. It is disgraceful, a stain
his mother thought she loved him more, much more, than all her other
a distant expedition, starting from the oak grove where there was an
think it all out later on!” But the later on never came.
her father was saying was correct.

ever-increasing crowds moving toward the Krémlin, the less he remembered
stain on the grass.
river—and on the right a porch. There were people at the entrance:
same gloomy expression, but suddenly turned to Pierre with a smile. For
had to be ordered to keep the “will” in.
But what is chance? What is genius?

I enjoy riding in company such as this... what could be better?” (he

‘twas growing dark last night.


a gold snuffbox on which was a portrait. In the middle of one of the



can, with all the pleasures of life here. If we were in Vienna it would
cannot tell us that it does not feel the law of attraction or repulsion
already begun to get used in the corridor, was still stronger here. It
influenced the whole army and directed it along the Mozháysk (that is,
carefully to cherish within himself the gloomy mood which alone enabled
one spot. His predictions were being justified. Part of the Russian
Toward evening Dolgorúkov came back, went straight to the Tsar, and
sobs.
regiments, both cavalry and infantry, were by no means ready for the
attacks. Both generals are angry, and the result is a challenge on
recruit as white as though there was no blood in his thin face, looked

right, Denísov stopped.
The grandee’s well-known mansion on the English Quay glittered with
his horse and rode to his quarters.
clearness, and charm that it seemed as if it were all a lost and
time.
After she felt herself deserted by Princes Mary and alone in her grief,
Polish ladies by her massive, so-called Russian type of beauty. The
Rostóvs requesting them to stand farther back, though as it was they

bandage was again removed and more than ten voices said together: “Sic
“Stop! Pull up, I tell you!” he cried in a piercing voice, and again

from Vienna to Znaim was shorter and better than the road for the
Konovnítsyn, and Bolkhovítinov.
were still the count’s games of whist and boston, at which—spreading
“If He were not,” he said quietly, “you and I would not be
are destroyed. Napoleon himself is no longer of any account; all his
happening. We kept wetweating and wetweating. Did you take part in the
entrenchment. They had to hold their noses and put their horses to a
received and read the then famous rescript of the Emperor Alexander
“How do you do, cousin?” said Pierre. “You don’t recognize

side to side, and all the faces bore the same swaggeringly resolute
compatriots of the province entrusted to your care till our efforts

him. He did not miss a single word he uttered, and would afterwards,
hours’ sleep before morning and felt cheerful, bold, and resolute,

Pétya’s mad action at the battle of Vyázma, where instead of riding by
room with rapid steps. Now he seemed to see her in the early days of
After a short silence the countess spoke again but this time no one

appear and hold their own, however incongruous their presence and their
followed Anna Mikháylovna out of the carriage, and only then began
him. But Pierre was not sufficiently sure of himself. He made as if he

“Do you think so?... Really? Truly?” she said, quickly smoothing her
“Aren’t you ready? It is nearly ten,” came the countess’ voice.


the worst,” said the Austrian general, evidently wishing to have done
“Confound him, he’s a fool!” said Rostóv.
One of the hindmost guns that was going onto the dam turned off onto the
ordinary occupations, and its breakfasts, lunches, dinners, and suppers,
event. In the English Club, where all who were distinguished, important,
can Sónya love Nicholas so calmly and quietly and wait so long and so
During his stay at Bald Hills all the family dined together, but they
    CHAPTER XVII
jest—that if Andrew got married he himself would marry Bourienne—had
the strength of an army to be identical with its numbers. Military
Prince Andrew remained at Bald Hills as usual during his father’s
to the dogs; one in a red cap, the other, a stranger, in a green coat.
discharged, and he had not had time to reload it. “No matter, the dagger
springing to him, putting her arms round him, and kissing him. This

imagination, and “the bird restored to its native fields” galloped to

down the room twice. His eyes shone and his mustache twitched as if he
with a long face and nose, as he entered the room.
history has invented.
give them strength to move on and endure their present privations. So
captured by the French because the enemy could not surmise that anyone
By Leo Tolstoy/Tolstoi
order what can be executed. But to know what can and what cannot be
about the Austrians and their uniforms, about their lines, about
honorable, Count,” or, “Were he as clever as you,” and so on,

love again, though for no one have I such a feeling of friendship,

she could hear reassuring words to the effect that baby was much better.
growing prettier and promised nothing more than she was already, but
without receiving any explanation.
man’s simple-minded eagerness, was explaining his pet theory. Both

in bed they would begin talking and go on till morning. They spoke most

Everywhere on the bank, on the dam, and in the pond, there was healthy,
of those who loved her—and that is why there are, and always will be,
business!”
resolutely took the salver with both hands and looked sternly and
something, but dared not.... No, it was I who dared not. But that’s
mouth all seemed puckered into a vacant, wearied grimace, and his arms
value this mystic power and glory that is floating here above me in this
of the enemy flared up, and while it retreated the army increased and
adjutant.
Perkhúshkovo the earth trembled from the firing, but nobody could answer
“Peter Kirílovich,” she began rapidly, “Prince Bolkónski was your

as ze sanctity of its alliances...” he spoke this last word with
and consciousness of the justice of our cause, exactly expressed by that
Denísov first went to the barrier and announced: “As the

body was strikingly out of proportion to her short legs. Prince Vasíli

gravitation, or heat, or the force that makes things grow; for reason,

“That will do, please, that will do. Have the goodness—please, sir, to

the countess, silently and minutely studied her childhood’s suitor. He
doing this or that action; but as soon as he has done it, that action
in comparison with eternity?”

“That was a real battle,” said an old soldier. “It’s the only one worth

or deliberately deceive themselves. No battle—Tarútino, Borodinó, or
“Eyes front!” Then, like the crowing of cocks at sunrise, this was
victories brought the French complete destruction, while the series
from Kutúzov, he felt the more irritated the more he felt himself
to raise... happens to everybody! Yes, who has not done it?”

Although that patience did come out, Pierre did not join the army,
round the company. He noticed the change in the little princess’
Secondly, it is assumed that the goal toward which humanity is being led
full height and addressing Michaud with a gracious and majestic gesture,
awful pain he suffered made him moan incessantly and piteously, and his

an unconsciously happy smile. Occasionally he rose and walked about the
evil, unhappiness, or sorrow.
Having returned to the regiment and told the commander the state of
white, strong teeth which showed in two unbroken semicircles when he

Emperor Napoleon burns with impatience to make Prince Auersperg’s
to turn it back again.
After a while he re-entered it as if to snuff the candles, and, seeing
good-looking, are even more run after.”
refuse Iogel and asked Sónya to dance. Denísov sat down by the old
went in to the countess. In all his encounters with his son, the count
Natásha did not hear him.
time because the old prince made difficulties. This letter grieved and
without looking at Rostóv, as was his way at moments of deep feeling.
It’s such pain, you know, that I wonder how he can bear it.”
containing the Sacred Host, which was left at her house for her to

our troops had descended and from whence came the sounds of firing.
The historians consider that, next to the battle of Borodinó and the
peasants had and increased the number by all possible means. He kept the
They went out and walked about till dinnertime, talking of the political
honor, whether they should group themselves by districts or by whole
one in honor of their Polish Mademoiselle Borzozowska) would take place

wrote proclamations.
invested with pomp and power and crowds of sychophants flatter power,
all the wrongs she had done him. When they prayed for those who love us,
“I should like to go to Kurágin’s,” thought he.
that’s why I have come... I am a relation. I shall not disturb him,
“They told her that all Moscow has been burned down, and that...”
returned to their owners that day.

self-satisfaction and enthusiasm, Natásha with a quiet, happy smile.
Volkónski, to hear from you the situation of the army and the reasons

the room.
“And I had no idea!...” exclaimed Princess Mary. “Ah, Andrew, I
there receive a place I dare not hope for myself. But not to speak of
division, the guerrillas’ reports of distress in Napoleon’s army, rumors
gained for him the general good will. This was his acknowledgment of
“No, you don’t understand!”
away her tears on her sister-in-law’s knee.

in Kishenëv with only a Moldavian peasant woman to help instead of a
When he had dismissed the generals Kutúzov sat a long time with his
The Austrian general looked dissatisfied, but had no option but to reply
purged of their presence.”
but again some instinct told her that though all this was true, and
doctor with a bow and approached them silently and with a look of
from me,” said he. “I have served twenty-three years and have done no
neatness, and order; so it was quite comprehensible and not strange that


strictly to obey. You said the bridge would be burned, but who would it
fetch the deputation had returned with the news that Moscow was empty,
the twenty-fifth. In view of all this information, when the enemy has
contrary to them because quite different subjects were talked about at
“piti-piti-piti,” and then “titi,” and then again “piti-piti-piti,” and
dark with sweat. On its long back sat Daniel, hunched forward, capless,


though there was a ford one third of a mile away, were proud that they

lively little girl’s look made him inclined to laugh without knowing
couple of bottles of wine by himself. The process in his mind went on
Andrew had gone and made the sign of the cross in his direction. From
wearing uniforms, stars, and ribbons, while ladies in satin and ermine
Dólokhov has been degraded to the ranks and Bezúkhov’s son sent
event must be allowed to disturb the appointed order of the day. Prince
was a brisk little man, very simple and affable. He indicated the stud

cathedral and crossing himself. Another, a young lad, a fair-haired
had no time to utter the decisive word which the expression of his face
horse and loosening his rein galloped forward, not heeding Denísov who
to do what had been done with him at Austerlitz and with Barclay at
Napoleon nodded assent.
under the shirt sleeves, those hands which he loved and hated, held him
he only gave an order to cease firing and re-form, so as to give room

the same. In Carriage Row carriages had been left in the shops, and
fire in several places. The buildings in Carriage Row, across the river,
The stranger’s face was not genial, it was even cold and severe, but
squadron. The day was bright and sunny after a sharp night frost, and
the other, glanced inquiringly with his large, intelligent, kindly eyes
carriage, and the solitude of the road, all had a gladdening effect on

him, the Emperor liked him, and he was young and interesting. That day
wives were created for them, Rostóv did not leave the lady’s side and
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
determine what is this power of one man over others.

before him and an assured position in society.
gentlemen, it is already time for me to go,” replied Prince Andrew
fulfilled if but approximately. When one of the opinions expressed

all poetry and old wives’ talk—all that doing good to one’s neighbor!
“I also wanted to ask you,” continued Prince Andrew, “if I’m


“May I make bold to trouble your honor?” said he respectfully, but with

of any word or deed taken separately.
of the fact that he traveled ten times as fast as the tortoise. By
asked Pierre.
“I don’t want one.”


“Well, now we’ll talk. I congratulate you on your betrothed.
“Why?” said the eldest Melyukóv girl.
had spent their time pleasantly in the company of the charming Frenchmen
behind them, in a large group, blue French dragoons on gray horses could
corresponding decrease of the Russian army.

something large, brilliant, and handsome moving toward her as she
the look Platón had given him as he sat under the tree, of the shot

Negroes and her women jesters from Moscow to her Sarátov estate, with
“to enter communal life completely, to be imbued by what makes them what
other end of the room. She and the countess and Sónya were standing by
mock me so... and now!” He was in a state of physical suffering as if
“In our temples we recognize no other distinctions,” read the Grand
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect
conceive of a man being free we must imagine him outside space, which is

not purposely say things to please her, but whatever he was saying he
insolent intelligence of his eyes, produced an effect which made it
the funeral. But this he was unable to do, for he received tidings that
our Fatherland! We will show Europe how Russia rises to the defense of
purpose,” thought he.
his being alone and despondent! A strange face may seem unpleasant or
frequently than the soldiers, but they already give commands. An

His father and mother were much the same, only a little older. What was
and was horrified to find neither. What meant still more to him was that
tone, and especially in that calm, almost antagonistic look could be
helplessly and he made a fruitless effort to pull it forward. Whether he
In the deathlike stillness only the tramp of horses was heard. This
everybody was asking what should be done, and all were trying to calm



his daughter that morning. Princess Mary well knew this painstaking
Dólokhov, showing him the memorandum. “Is that right?”
“Ah, that is just what I tell him!” said she. “I don’t

world!”
    CHAPTER IV
move on a few steps and be killed themselves in the same way.
opened the creaking door, went up to the sofa with energetic steps of

The French, the spy reported, having crossed the Vienna bridge, were

know life, our life is finished!”

“Exactly, not a hair’s breadth farther,” answered Prince Vasíli,
“We have been looking for you everywhere,” said the adjutant. “The count
ultimately vanquished, attack of terror before the unknown.
the fields), “there is no truth, all is false and evil; but in the
physical consciousness of her nearness. She was sitting in an armchair
people get over everything!”
him and would not have others do so.”
by someone’s order, the battery had continued firing and was only not
“Can one see from there?... If you would...”
people against their will to kill their fellow men—that force the effect

but not yet sure what stirred him or what he would say. Scarcely had he
material for science.
a movement. With a pleasant smile Berg related how the Grand Duke
family. Military, administrative, political, and Masonic interests
Splendid! And I am sitting here ill, as you see.”
say in her salon, and secretaries of the embassy, and even ambassadors,
perhaps are already there! Tíkhon!” Tíkhon jumped up. “No, no, I don’t

commander in chief’s carriage, and he sat down on the bench at the gate

driver’s leg. Their spirits once roused were, however, not diminished,


easy. And tell me, please—I’ve been meaning to ask—how is he

“Yes!” she replied. “And with thee?”
unnoticed by others, never for an instant ceased to observe the Emperor
     * (2) That it is great.
protecting a woman,” and that “to protect a woman who was being insulted
represented by e, the very letter elided from the article le before the
dressing gown, spectacled and wigless, shouting in an angry voice.

step toward regularizing this method of warfare.
draw breath.
“Ah, God! My God! What is it? The stomach? That means death! My
soldiers, munching biscuit and beating a tattoo with their feet to
dinner.

Hills with his wife, his mother, and Sónya.
miniature portrait of her son on the lid of a snuffbox, while the tears
The sounds, which he had not heard for so long, had an even more
my wife,” said Prince Andrew to himself quite to his own surprise, as
He dreamed that he was lying in the room he really was in, but that

done no harm to anyone; why must I suffer so? Help me!” her look
quilt. The eyes and face of the sick man showed impatience. He made an
cavalry was brought in, convoyed by a sótnya of Cossacks. Evidently the
came ambassadors, ministers, and various generals, whom Perónskaya
surprise him was that during these last two years his wife had succeeded
Moscow and go nowhere? No, I won’t let you off! Mademoiselle George
said Prince Andrew when they had gone into the large room where the
This short man nodded to Dolgorúkov as to an intimate friend and stared
Paulucci was there because he was bold and decided in speech. The
with his right hand, then falling on one knee he twirled her round him,

caused by the Emperor’s presence, he danced, and had chosen Natásha
sent to Vorónezh to buy remounts for his division, not only without
no such reminiscences really exist—just as none existed in this case.
with them as he had been pleased with those of the naval officer, the
steward, and again began giving orders. A light footstep and the
Pierre drove on toward Górki.

to defend the town against Napoleon’s whole army. In Smolénsk, at the
Rostóv had come to Tilsit the day least suitable for a petition
his last visit to Moscow.
and am able to show my readiness to serve you,” said Rostóv, rising. “Go

listen to an angry reprimand for not having provided his full quota of
commander of the regiment in the hollow and news that immense masses
be) who had crushed him.
gist of the matter lay in that.


bleeding head and no cap was being dragged along by two soldiers who
Rostopchín alone kept the conversation going, now relating the latest

ruined!”
guessed that the best position for an army after its retreat from Moscow
shoulders, “do you care for me or not? Eh? Now, do me a service....

Hélène always has—men friends who can never change into lovers—once gave
attention to these things. But when our artillery or cavalry advanced or

The way to Iligin’s upland was across the fields. The hunt servants
the shouts of the mob, the count began to repent. He remembered with

Sónya’s thin little shoulders, Natásha’s eyes and laughter,
of the bare trees often fell across the road and hid the brilliant




swooped down,” said the woman, pointing to the French soldiers.

herself wish to die, that his end was not only touching but edifying. As
“Good-by!” he said and turned with his groom toward the inn.
uncertain whether to stop or to play something else.
twenty-fifth of August, 1812, did they think that a battle might be
ague.

round face of a Rostóv, entered the yard.
but there was no other fire, and Pierre sat down, trying not to look at
seeing three yards under a man is considered an attribute of wizards.
“I am very, very grateful to you, mon cher,” or “ma chère”—he
to the hussar beside him.

in war a battalion is sometimes stronger than a division and sometimes


The peasants went up and took him by his shoulders and legs, but he

face changed into a winning and piteous look of fear. Her beautiful eyes
remained on the farther side of the bridge facing the enemy, who could
Princess Mary, then sat thinking for a while with that expression of
away with Grékov whose men had quickly assembled. They disappeared into
definition reason gives it. Freedom, apart from necessity, that is,
father to give his consent, irritating him and having to bear the brunt
“But we daren’t. In our regiment two officers were court-martialed for
that no one could understand it. She loved and knew Prince Andrew, he
“besides,” thought he, “all such ‘words of honor’ are
whole forthcoming battle from right to left (looking from the Russian
so many years Moravians in shaggy caps and blue jackets had peacefully

of horses had been sent up the highroad to meet the German doctor from


nothing.
With regard to supplies for the army, Napoleon decreed that all the
No one replied to this remark and for some time they all gazed silently
To fluff out her curls, put on fashionable dresses, and sing romantic
    CHAPTER XIV

nephew, almost every time that, pointer in hand, she sat down to show

evidently displeased both reader and audience. The people’s minds
love. Her melancholy, however, began to turn to irritability, and not
said he, carrying away into the darkness a glowing stick.
“How am I to understand you, mon père?” said the princess, growing
he be accused of ambition. More than once he had vexed his father by
French or Russian, could not be discovered from the Shevárdino Redoubt.
forgotten all that had happened to her. She no longer complained of her
did not order it to be sold.”
frontier.

On the rest of the way to Moscow, though the princess’ position was not
Alpátych entered the innyard at a quicker pace than usual and went
CHAPTER X
study. Though Daniel was not a big man, to see him in a room was

and Dólokhov saw through the gloom that Pétya was bending toward him and
is the only difference between them.” He said this smiling in a way
houses, were in uniform—some in that of Catherine’s day, others in that

girls and avoiding their eyes.

The singing did not sound loud under the open sky. An immense crowd

Having reached his country house and begun to give orders about domestic
a peasant coat and cap. Physically he had changed much during this
“Nicholas has the weakness of never agreeing with anything not generally
In an hour’s time the whole hunting party was at the porch. Nicholas,
I am to do; I wanted to consult you seriously.”
better now. Natásha had not left her room that morning. With compressed
and who was one of the disinterested friends so brilliant a woman as
better!”
“Your position is doubly terrible, dear princess,” said Mademoiselle
count, from his study where he was talking to Mítenka, heard her and,
Princess Mary took Pierre into the drawing room.
sir!”
Dólokhov who was in the midst of the crowd forced his way to the edge
the mornings—what is called an “old wives’ summer.”
there was still the same bewitching combination of majesty and mildness
wants to have a place rubbed that has been hurt. A child knocks itself
“The dishes must go in here among the carpets,” said she.
The conversation ended by the count, who wished to be generous and to
real state of French public opinion.”
“Mr. Dimmler, please play my favorite nocturne by Field,” came the
meant to double the three thousand just put down to his score, when
those who lagged behind. Pierre felt that that fatal force which had
demonstrations of love of Bourienne.
how his actions might affect others or what the consequences of this or
life itself—is rubbish it is pleasant to throw away, compared with
having given orders to his company, sent a soldier to find a dressing
letter.
over a fire brigade of Bonaparte’s, that will be another story and

At Anna Pávlovna’s on the twenty-sixth of August, the very day of the
“That’s just it, my dear fellow. You see it’s hurrah for the Tsar,
said Speránski, indicating by a smile that he wished to finish amiably

“Whom shall I announce?”
in the action itself and that their activity is exclusively directed to

The moment he heard the firing and the cry from behind, the general
“Uncle” led the visitors through the anteroom into a small hall with
Princess Mary stood with downcast eyes not daring to look either at her
The second consideration is the more or less evident time relation of
Saltykóv, Arakchéev, Vyazmítinov, Lopukhín, and Kochubéy met to consider
“Don’t put it in so carelessly,” said one of the peasants, a man with a
“I have the honor to report to you the actual truth,” said Alpátych.
While the troops, dividing into two parts when passing around the
coldly.
those richer and more powerful than himself and he had rare skill in
opera she had heard in Petersburg with Prince Andrew. What she drew from
Pávlovna’s hand and for some reason drawing it downwards. “Arrange
free agricultural laborers—this being one of the first examples of
officer that it was all Denísov could do to prevent a duel. When

“Discharge me, little mother, for God’s sake! Order the keys to be taken
being moved, and the probing of his wound at the dressing station.

blinding light of history focused upon him; a character exposed to those

replied that he was of age, that Prince Andrew was marrying without his
own family and valuables from his estate.
events in the will of one man; he is as right as the Russian historians

their muskets. A general with his suite came to the battery, and after
I give you my word. Never,” he repeated in a trembling voice like a boy
it was that the pain distracted him and prevented his seeing what he had
And this simple reflection suddenly destroyed all the interest Prince
given receptions) now hardly let a day go by without having an evening
“Still the same,” she said to her husband.
he is asking for you....”
But the countess did not want the question put like that: she did not
our men or theirs run or do not run, and that this man or that man is
the road. The men sat huddled up trying not to stir, so as to warm the
“Ah, my dear,” said the countess, “my life is not all roses
children,” she said, in her loud, full-toned voice which drowned all
to enliven him and amuse themselves. But their gaiety seemed to Prince
greater part of the enemy’s opened out from this battery. Just facing
across his puffy face, and bowing low and respectfully he took the

“Long-coat” which settled him. Bennigsen suddenly reddened and paced
Sónya sat up. The little kitten brightened, its eyes shone, and it
was rallied about Princess Bolkónskaya.
Once she came to her mother, tried to say something, and suddenly began
“A Negro,” chimed in Nicholas with a smile of delight. “Of course
movement of the bodies, he expressed the property common to all bodies
the foe made him forget his own sorrow. He was entirely devoted to the
insult Alexander—just what he had least desired at the commencement of

The adjutant on duty, meeting Prince Andrew, asked him to wait, and went
    * “You clear out of this.”


indecision, and sometimes the thought occurred to her that she was
rapier gracefully and politely, hand it to their magnanimous conqueror,


but so softly that I could not hear it. Then it seemed that we all left

till now. But where am I?”
“Isn’t it fine, eh, Uncle Ignát?” said the boy, suddenly beginning to
    CHAPTER XXI
which will have forty guns in all directed against it.
Natásha. The same thought was meanwhile tormenting Princess Mary. She
impending war.
for saving his life.

impulses has remained unknown.
Pierre.
were talking and listening too eagerly and too naturally, which was why
an expression of perplexity, turned round to Milorádovich as if seeking

then so, do you see?” and he pushed Anatole’s head forward to meet the
appeared, and they were called to breakfast. Natásha kept looking
evening on the fourth of August.
up with quivering tail from which tufts of matted hair hung down.
Princess Mary raised her head, dried her eyes, and turned to Natásha.
sake. I was bound to act that way.... The mob, the traitor... the public
Prince Andrew smiled.
so on, the farther movement of the fleeing French, and of the Russians
“Good health...”
Natásha and I used to as children, that the snow might turn into
his colonel.
which he was so fond, and moved with his mother and Sónya to a small
patroness. She added that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke
“Your excellency, you gave him leave yourself, on the march.”
“You remember when I looked in the mirror for you... at Otrádnoe at

this he’ll soon have us, too, for his subjects! How are you?” And he
something they spoke of would awaken memories distressing to her. She
Of the war Princess Mary thought as women do think about wars. She

friend—is your friend,” she corrected herself. (It seemed to her that
onto the snow. She was sitting on some bundles a little behind the old


reach some decision, first followed him and then ran downstairs.
I dreamed that Joseph Alexéevich was sitting in my house, and that I
mind and said “to take tea with us,” and quickly doubling up his
Princess Mary looked at him with frightened inquiry, not understanding

help him.


“How plainly all these young people wear their hearts on their

She even turned so that he should see her profile in what she thought


quiet for a moment. Suddenly she sat up with unaccustomed swiftness,
“You are still the same dreamer, I see,” remarked Borís, shaking
The dispositions were very complicated and difficult. They began as
That part of the line was not entrenched and in front of it the ground
the cause of his dispositions not being as well-planned as on former
hinted that he would burn Moscow and related how he had set fire to his
When Princess Mary had left Prince Andrew she fully understood what
“Just imagine—I knew nothing about him!” said he. “I thought he had been

snow a purple-black and starry sky showed itself and the frost grew
reason for slackening the pace and delaying presented itself to Kutúzov.
“Ah, if only I were a man! I’d certainly stay with you. How splendid!”
that which caused Russians to grieve, he had such a sad face when shown
knew till after eight o’clock.
at his partner with a merry and triumphant air, suddenly stamped with
she was right, and to avoid compromising her went away to Moscow.

of the road were forests of different kinds, fields, and villages.
and interesting person to the visitors and that nowhere else was the
Princess Mary understood this and appreciated his delicacy.
“Especially such a capital fellow as Bezúkhov!” In Natásha’s
take these away. Put this on the seat and this to the right.”
containing information about the orders to the French army had been
“How delightful it is, Count!” said she. “Isn’t it?”
listening to these love stories his own love for Natásha unexpectedly



strayed off the track into the snow, Pierre looked down at his feet,
as form to content, do we get the mutually exclusive and separately

a few minutes later. “Now our Natásha has come to life. You should have

with the hussar colonel on his left and Shinshín and the other male
enter his head that he was in love with Natásha; he was not thinking
and horses) had it not occurred to Rostóv to flourish his whip before

Highness who everybody said possessed powers such as no man had ever had
“And of state interest to some extent,” said Prince Andrew.
He was the bravest and most useful man in the party. No one found more
increased tenfold, and their life, which seemed to have been passed in
did not understand and was not interested in any of these questions and
four years before; and so he was taken aback when quite a different
If the purpose of marriage is the family, the person who wishes to have



harvesting.
might easily succeed to the post; how popular he was with everyone in
Before the battle of Borodinó our strength in proportion to the French

“I still can’t understand what you are afraid of,” said Prince


“What were you thinking about just now, Nicholas?” inquired
The vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile.
mined?”
position they had intended to occupy and took up a new position which
see the city and, hearing that everything had been abandoned, rushed
French, do not even feel animosity toward them.”
and the other orders to take with him when he went to dinner.
touched him was sent flying.

Our body is like a perfect watch that should go for a certain time; the

“I much regret her illness,” said Prince Andrew; and he smiled like his
in conflict with a raw army of half its numerical strength, and led by
now permissible; “the door to the left, ma’am.”
can without hurting others.”

At eight o’clock Kutúzov rode to Pratzen at the head of the fourth
impossible to imagine two different courses of action in precisely the
the rearguard stood with a staff officer, scanning the country through
tilted to one side, disclosed his curled and pomaded hair besprinkled
The reddish Lyubím rushed forward from behind Mílka, sprang

And he began explaining why he could not put up with his daughter’s
third company he suddenly stopped. His suite, not having expected this,
her. I cannot propose to her at present, but the thought that
away, to pursue its fatal path to Smolénsk.

Particularly vivid, humiliating, and shameful was the recollection of
but powerful influence exerted on them while he lived by the count’s
continue their flight? Despite his desperate shouts that used to seem
shops, bakers’ signboards, street lamps, and sleighs!” thought
That was what had happened to him two days before Princess Mary’s
complete bewilderment. “Only so could I be completely happy; but now I
Mikháylovna Drubetskáya. Rostóv, the father, is Ilyá, and his son is
alone with Hélène in the little drawing room where they were sitting.
remember—yet they sat at tea round the samovar in the drawing room from
Kutúzov chose this latter course.
solemn interest and silent approval. The aunt spoke to each of them in
Kutúzov replied to this letter as he had done to the one formerly

Natásha, who was sitting opposite to him with her eldest daughter on her


and countess alike—turned to look at her as if wondering why she had
admiration at the Milky Way.
Tarútino. The news of that battle of Tarútino, unexpectedly received


inevitability itself, that is, a mere form without content.
“But that’s impossible,” said Prince Andrew as if it were a matter

simple,” she thought as she got into her carriage.

only because he knew that everyone has friends, “you see, I have

from his mother, written without his father’s knowledge, and that

A series of experiments and arguments proves to every man that he, as
buy. But he liked them; liked that mad driving at twelve miles an hour,
to state his views plainly to the Emperor? Is it possible that on
“Ah, c’est vous!” said Pétya. “Voulez-vous manger? N’ayez pas peur, on
the figure cut in the stencil.

At that moment, with soft steps, the countess came in shyly, in her cap
title of Emperor and showing him every respect, though five years before
gesticulating. The conversation was about Speránski—the news of whose

quite change the whole war and make it less cruel. As it is we have
and physically feeble during his stay in that town. He attended to army
wrinkled soles and palms.

I don’t want to have you like our silly ladies. Get used to it and
now in mourning. How can one think of it!”
brother, and that Anna Mikháylovna was preparing them for it. Bold as
choose. I give you freedom. Only remember that your life’s happiness

feeble voice of the commander in chief was heard. The regiment roared,
of his conduct and repenting of it, Rostóv, with downcast eyes, was
And it is well for a people who do not—as the French did in 1813—salute
the deep wet snow between the place where they had been standing and

him of his rank and mission. Contrary to his expectation, Davout, after
me quarrel with him, but you see I need neither her nor you!”
“Well, good-by, Matrëna,” said Anatole, kissing her. “Ah, my revels here
up and down his room, now turning his thoughts on a difficult problem

“You?” he said. “How fortunate!”
Two dragoons took it by its distorted legs and dragged it along the
striking chords with his short fingers, his legs thrown back and his
by so calling it they have explained its meaning. But such a war does
not merely one but several such), presents a new project diametrically
duel he did not go to his bedroom but, as he often did, remained in his
what was happening in front.
God ruling us can bear a loss such as hers and... yours.”
“Herself,” came the answer in a rough voice, and Márya Dmítrievna

alive could understand or explain.
to the fox which began to dodge between the field in sharper and sharper
human race, and his own progress to the highest degree of perfection?
“Even divorce you?” said he.

elders.
    CHAPTER VII
air. “A man told me to give you this—” and she handed Natásha a

No, certainly I must not approach him, I must not intrude on his

1812—the Barclays, Raévskis, Ermólovs, Plátovs, and Milorádoviches. Like
He was thinking of Prince Andrew, of Natásha, and of their love, at one

hunger on the road, many returned of their own accord, and the movement


Understandable and touching as the look with which Natásha gazed at
lips compressed and gave her husband no reply.
pointing to Nicholas, “his friend Borís has become an officer, and
Till midday on the nineteenth, the activity—the eager talk, running to


among them and could not utter a word. He hugged the first soldier who
head and leg by bullets. Around him, eagerly listening to his talk, a

who was asleep with his back to her, rose on tiptoe and kissed the hand
to have two estates in Pénza and the Nizhegórod forests). Anna
“To see the Governor by his excellency’s order,” answered Alpátych,

“Why have you come here, Count?” he asked with a smile. “Still
every word that he or Natásha had spoken and pictured every detail of
Ilyín put a few drops of rum into the bucket of water and brought it to
taken for the army or have died—this is such a year! It’s not a case of
war.
Dessalles, having asked to see Princess Mary, told her that, as the
feelings. But much as all the rest laughed, talked, and joked, much

possible. His conversation was always sprinkled with wittily original,
is that the Emperor is here. How he looked at me and wished to say

Both avoided any allusion to the future. To admit the possibility of
“And how’s it you’re not afraid, sir, really now?” a red-faced,
with pleasure to his own voice. “All I can say, General, is that if
accustomed, as if all that was taking place and all that had still to be
depths of the country.

time is infinite, and so in this respect too there can never be absolute



French pronunciation which she could allow herself when conversing with
portfolio under his arm really did appear.
visit his neglected estates at the same time and pick up his son Anatole
Prince Andrew went out.
unfolding of the oak buds is the cause of the cold wind, for the
matter the conditions and circumstances of which are unknown and cannot
from them; even the soldiers, usually pitiless enough, instead of taking
no idea, never guessed at all.”

at Prince Andrew when he talked to Natásha and timidly started some
knapsack a scrap of blue French cloth, and wrapped it round his foot.
amid the smoke that screened it. On the sloping descent to the Dnieper
After a few days they grew accustomed to him, and without restraint in
mot d’ordre be not virtue alone but independence and action as well!”
guests joined in. Everyone laughed, not at Márya Dmítrievna’s answer
would give way not only under a cannon or a crowd, but very soon even
our men had begun firing. They were still firing, not at the cavalry
round and notices here a spindle that has stopped or there one that
Princess Mary asked the countess to let Natásha go with her to Moscow,
boyars.


his valets were still taking off his things, he picked up a book and
“It was my fault, mon père,” interceded the little princess, with a
Speránski which was still going on between the two old men.
The little princess did not, or did not wish to, hear his words. She was

“Ah, there are still lights in the drawing room!” she said, pointing
That hesitation lasted only an instant. The Tsar’s foot, in the narrow
“The unpleasant things were said to me,” remarked Véra, “I said
going on there, but he had no time to dwell on that idea.
be found, especially around young sovereigns, and of whom there were
The oasis of the Otrádnoe covert came in sight a few hundred yards off,
course of events in the forthcoming action in broad outline. He
takes place: the continuity of movement in time both of the events and
brought him in contact with, particularly with man—not any particular
servant.”
hall, where Denísov was sitting on the same chair by the clavichord
of cavalry came up and disappeared in the sea of mist. In front and
hoofs and the jingling of showy cavalry in blue, red, and green braided
necessity, to one who knows the circumstances in which these people were
several French soldiers in a variety of clothing. Pierre took no notice
Character set encoding: UTF-8
clouds of dust they raised and making the air ring with a deafening roar
Eager, frightened, helpless glances were turned on Alpátych when he came
crossed himself three times.
eyes caused the little girl to smile.
made by the young lad.
that....”
“Very well, then, be so good as to wait,” said Prince Andrew to the

her friend, the princess’ eyes—large, deep and luminous (it seemed
at balls, amiably smiling in the society of the most brilliant women,
CHAPTER XVI
Among the young men introduced by Rostóv one of the first was
handful of scoundrels. It will soon be over, it can’t be that, it
not but believe in the sincerity of those around him. Besides, he had


chance, letting the seven be dealt to the right rather than to the left,

done, the Rhetor said:
historians tell us with naïve assurance that its causes were the wrongs
The horses that had previously been invisible could now be seen to their
peasant of his party, to Shámshevo to try and seize at least one of the
which Denísov followed her.

just at moments when such thoughts occurred to him, he would ask in a
free to take his goods back to his village and no one may hinder him
he dressed for dinner. The old prince always dressed in old-fashioned
“Bonaparte treats Europe as a pirate does a captured vessel,” said
“I don’t like your Mademoiselle Bourienne at all,” said Prince
“Oh, I’ve forgotten...” she replied. “But none of you would
Arkhárovs; they have a party.”

sweetly. It was the third time that day that, with an ecstatic and
“There! There!” shouted the Frenchman at the window, pointing to the


guns were advanced, the artillerymen blew the ash off their linstocks,
should or should not do, but the standard was quite firm and definite in
us aides-de-camp and adjutants! But this is what we’ll do: I have


Bolkónski stiffly and coldly and told him in his foreign accent that he
laughing.


were heard on all sides. But the liveliest attention was attracted by


no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use
Pierre’s attire by now consisted of a dirty torn shirt (the only
to wait for him and rode to the spot where the enemy’s, Ilágin’s,


arm and stepping back from the door.
could have been devised. This combination of Austrian precision with
I have asked these gentlemen to meet to discuss is a military one.

whether they want rain or fine weather: “The wind has blown the clouds
“Oh no, not at all too young!” replied the count. “Why, our
over to the wall, and began snuggling up the bedclothes as she settled
expression on his face pleased Natásha.

times, the more impassioned he became in these moments of almost morbid

a state, live like brothers, render mutual aid and protection one to
and flask, and swung his heavy person easily into the saddle.
Pierre continued, in French, to persuade the officer not to hold that
hussar who had the prisoner, rode to the left across a ravine to the

Scarcely had Pierre laid his head on the pillow before he felt himself
hope of recovery. It was impossible for him to travel, it would not do
Drissa fortifications with the Emperor and had pointed out to him that
“Yes, my dear, this is a great loss for us all, not to speak of you.
“Going on?” Pierre exclaimed. “Why more than ever! The Bible Society is
before the door opened and Countess Bezúkhova, dressed in a purple
the strength of that impetus was exhausted and no fresh push was
examination of the accounts with Mítenka did not last long. The village
Prince Andrew was silent, but the princess noticed the ironical and

who advised the Drissa camp—I see no alternative but the lunatic asylum
way!... Let us pass!... Stop there, you devil with the cart! I’ll hack

old countess’ voice from the drawing room.
    CHAPTER VI
“Don’t touch him! You’ll startle him and then he’ll be killed.
remarks he rose. “If you’ll allow me to leave my Natásha in your
silent.
in order to stifle thoughts that were too oppressive and too intimate.
After a few minutes’ bustle beside the high bedstead, those who had
“But what am I to do?”

Count,” she said to Pierre, “even our dear cousin Borís, who,

of the horse, of the morning, of the doctor’s wife, but not once of the
and inevitably he lapsed into falsehood. If he had told the truth to his
go, for God’s sake go! You see how I am suffering!” Natásha cried
“Never mind, I’ll run it up, it won’t show,” said Dunyásha.

before his shelter, had been tasted.
porter were all sitting in the cellar, listening. The roar of guns, the
thoughts he had had when lying there. It was unsatisfactory everywhere,
horses. The rain was descending in torrents, and Rostóv, with a young
full gallop through the Moscow streets. He liked to hear those wild,
not listening to it continued to dress while walking about, and three
CHAPTER XXII



indefinite feeling of shame and awkwardness. The conversations he heard
height the situation demanded. And all these groups, while talking
was talk of all the government offices having been already removed from
done the job just as well.”
“It would have been hard to drive up, your honor,” he added. “I

in her gruff voice: “So wives of living men have started marrying
taking him by the hand led him forward. The hairs tied in the knot hurt
made by Napoleon during the battle. But this was not and could not be

bridge, cross it, and now with their whole army are on this side of the
under the icons. “Granddad” himself, as Malásha in her own mind called
to explain frankly to some gentleman-in-waiting (he imagined the Emperor
homme.” *
father’s door. “Why are these people with frightened faces stopping me?
he suddenly cried. “Even without a bet, there! Tell them to bring me a
The old man was in a good temper after his nap before dinner. (He
Princess Mary had long since put aside her book: she sat silent, her
In a queenless hive no life is left though to a superficial glance it
Through the door came the sounds of Kutúzov’s voice, excited and

the regiment. The horse of an ammunition cart put its leg over a trace.

Hill lay spaciously spread out with her river, her gardens, and her

taste. And she had a lady’s maid, also big. She said....”
now leading him somewhere with unhesitating assurance on their faces
voice, obviously so elated by the sound of firing, by the prospect of


Before they reached the room from which the sounds of the clavichord
quite close at hand, and a voice of naïve terror barely two steps from


They gave him some more porridge and Morel with a laugh set to work on
to overtake my regiment, which must by now be getting near the Rogózhski
But on glancing at Rostóv’s face Ilyín stopped short. He saw that his
now.”
asked: “How is he?”
troops that had entered Formínsk that day were the vanguard of the whole
Having ridden beyond the village, continually meeting and overtaking
to the vestibule. There an old footman and two young ones were playing
“No! No! No! When your father writes to tell me that you are behaving
“At such a moment!” Prince Andrew repeated. “To them it is only a moment
Everyone moved back, and the Emperor came smiling out of the drawing
As she read she glanced at the sleeping Natásha, trying to find in her
Cossacks, while others ran down the hill toward the pond. Pétya was
ordered his horse at once and, coldly taking leave of Borís, rode
whole campaign and by the battle of Borodinó, the Russian army—when
“It is dawn,” thought Pierre. “But that’s not what I want. I want to
As he looked at the matter in this way, he learned that he was being

at a continually increasing speed and all its energy was directed to
But what is the matter with you, Mary?” he suddenly asked.
before his shop which opened onto the street. On seeing Alpátych he went
his verses, bowed to Bagratión. Everyone rose, feeling that dinner

quarters of Moscow) the whole mass of prisoners suddenly started to one

tattered coat and trodden-down boots.
all humanity.


Russian army found vent in anger at Zherkóv’s untimely jest.
advancing straight toward the inner door.
Prince Andrew could not have explained how or why it was, but after that
And with a furtive glance at his son’s face, the count went out of the
All that we know of the life of man is merely a certain relation of free
on the old general. He carefully and hastily felt himself all over,
him—whether important or quite trifling—such as: Where would he live?
“This is not at all the thing,” he said. “What sort of Polish

those human wills, man’s mind postulates arbitrary and disconnected
stood in front of him also listening and smiling. Nicholas did not take

This expression evidently pleased him.
mind to ask him a question about the roads, the traveler had closed his
Prince Saltykóv, in which he insisted on the words being inserted that

little Dokhtúrov whom no one had described to us as drawing up plans
“Ma foi, sire, nous ferons ce qui sera dans notre possibilité,
the nursery was all he saw and heard from his former enchantress.
approached Bolkónski with a slight bow. Bolkónski made room for him on
Vílna on the eleventh, and in his traveling sleigh drove straight to
Míshka had opened the clavichord and was strumming on it with

up his table napkin he pushed back the tumbler and wineglass standing
wants a son and not an old maid,” he would say. Or, turning to
the Russian soldiers with red and vacant eyes. Occasionally he emitted
something should be done, which is felt by those who are suffering. They
along beside her while the coach still moved on.
Mikháylovna?” said he. “Let us wait until evening. The doctors are
CHAPTER XXVI
    CHAPTER VI
has received a letter and is expecting a visit from Prince Vasíli. In
“Stop them!” he shouted, and at the same moment, probably realizing
take the landlord’s grain,” said a voice at the back of the crowd.
Pierre went up to him, though he knew his attempt would be vain.
Pierre, swaying his stout body, advanced, making way through the crowd
to the Imperial family as well as to all Moscow and Petersburg, and both
on his farm. In autumn he gave himself up to hunting with the same
had cleared up, and near the next hut two officers and a cadet were
moment I could make only one movement, and whatever movement I made
Natásha were talking about. She heard the sound of their voices through


wringing her hands.
“So I come, master, and the people say to me: ‘A great blessing has

of which Kutúzov was standing began to shout, he rode a little to one
Having glanced through the dispatch he laid it on the table and looked
The huntsmen got the fox, but stayed there a long time without strapping
“You’d better wait till she’s married....”
hurrying away on her old legs, went through the back yard to the
“So she knows I am engaged, and she and her husband Pierre—that good

Milorádovich wheeled his horse sharply and stationed himself a little

thought Pierre. “But this man knows the truth and, if he wished to,
University, from the Foundling Hospital, the Suffragan has sent...

not survive the fall of Moscow, and now wrote French verses in albums
Sónya interrupted him.
told Pierre why she had sent for him. She was afraid that the count or
Sónya was afraid to leave Natásha and afraid of being in the way when
wanted a more distinguished and wealthier match for Andrew. And they
recently been away driving a government transport, had returned with
“Always busy,” replied Michael Ivánovich with a respectfully ironic


And Pierre suddenly realized what a special, independent, complex, and

rays!” and she smiled amiably at Pierre. “We were just talking of you,”
and women danced with bare legs. Then the king again shouted to the
flank with but half as many men. (Poniatowski’s action against Utítsa,
“Monster! Villain!” shouted the woman angrily, suddenly ceasing to weep.
smile that never left his face. Jauntily shifting the position of his
her brother that Papa was asleep and Mamma was in the sitting room, ran
tumbler with tea for himself and one for the beardless old man to whom

suite, and in the smoke that suddenly surrounded the gun they could see
evoking the best side of his nature and taking a pleasure in so doing.
chances presented themselves, and he expected them all. Yes, it was like

as young people often do. “No, I am too happy now to spoil my
favoring Golítsyn and mysticism, and afterwards Shishkóv and Photius.
doing just what every Russian desired. So what was the use of performing
Princess Mary.

hidden by dense mist. Having given orders in the commander in chief’s
aching all over; anyway I shan’t be able to keep up.”
from a young girl either such firmness or such skill in nursing a

a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written
After reaching home Nicholas was at first serious and even dull. He was


“I don’t consider myself bound to answer questions put to me in that

all felt it to be so.

to everyone. Pierre was so used to that smile, and it had so little

if he were a king! All the same, the French are charming, very charming.
twenty-sixth, attacked the whole Russian army, which was in position on
which the base with the largest diameter consists of the rank and file;
The former housekeeper, old Mávra Kuzmínichna, had stepped out of the

set him completely free.
“If you order it they will go away,” said he.
been destroyed or not. And if they have somehow been overlooked, you
embarrassed, “is the Emperor...?”
ill! I was only there a few moments and hardly said a word...”
“How is he?”


“Oh, do the best you can! Isn’t it all the same?” The doctor
ranks.
wise, and kind like Pierre. In Pierre’s presence his face always shone
be carried back with it oneself. Bolkónski only tried not to lose

    CHAPTER XII
At the beginning of July more and more disquieting reports about the war
everyone in the drawing room.
her. Trying to convict her, he told her she had worn him out, had caused
the right to grant dispensations...”
Denísov’s a fine fellow. But that’s all nonsense. The chief thing
“You’ll never get well like that,” she would say, forgetting her grief

without giving them a glance, turned to Balashëv:
some painted cardboard representing trees, and at the back was a cloth
“Go, Natásha! I will call you,” said the countess in a whisper.
contradict one another.

her mother praying and sighing and the creaking of her bed under
got back to their horses. Two were misdirected and the shot went too

Speránski he had found this ideal of a perfectly rational and virtuous

conscious of ever since the appearance of the comet, and especially
“Then it’s all right?” said Nicholas, again scrutinizing the
smile that usually brightened her face. Pierre knew that everyone was
of which is hidden in the unknown but at the other end of which a
posted, two men appeared on horse back. They were an aide-de-camp

the same way toward Karatáev.
family, Count Ilyá Rostóv, continually drove about the city collecting
Sónya did not succumb to the tender tone Natásha used toward her.
and convinced himself that the man was indeed a liberal, but of views

of means or because he did not like to part from his young wife in
Prince Andrew. “But where is it?” he again wondered, gazing at
The adjutant came out to the porch and asked Prince Andrew to lunch with
room, grew silent and gazed with eyes full of curiosity or expectancy at
the war in Italy he is several times on the verge of destruction and
heard before, others simply enjoyed hearing how the master talked, while

Pelagéya suddenly grew quite pale and clasped her hands.



     incontestable. Certain rights and privileges for the
things.

superiority over those sovereigns of the day who co-operated with him;
to him, as you so well know how to be.”

The history of culture explains to us the impulses and conditions of
sky. There was no wind, and the men choked in that motionless
“Charming!” whispered the little princess, sticking the needle into
answer that voice and went on dreaming of his triumphs. The dispositions

    CHAPTER XII
habit of walking, had been swept: the marks of the broom were still
you hear; hammering and knocking—that’s bad; but a sound of shifting
younger members of the company, and asked himself each time, “What is
Since early morning—despite an injunction not to approach the picket
possible.
receive that science it is necessary to purify and renew one’s inner
“Because I hate ghost stories,” said Prince Hippolyte in a tone
letter.
Moscow, or losing Moscow alone, the field marshal had to choose the
field. Instead of the moving horses and hussars’ backs, he saw nothing
his gloves and carrying his hat under his arm. He stopped and looked
seem.

hearing what was said to him. Napoleon did not notice this expression;
talking, or sometimes listening to Pierre’s stories, and then would go
“It is disgraceful to run away from danger; only cowards are running
One. “Oh, this senseless life of ours!” thought Nicholas. “All
indignation against the foreigners and an increase in patriotic zeal.
It was in French.

away the tables! And we were sitting so quietly. Ha, ha, ha!... The
“Well, never mind, some of the things can be unloaded,” he added in a
eventuality could alter the efficiency of the Drissa camp, that
chair and pacing up and down the room followed by Tíkhon, who ran after
He kissed his sister, holding her hand in his as was their wont.
him to die. Others are being born and there are plenty of them as it is.
one considers that by tomorrow one may be dead, or something so
attentively and scrutinizingly at her. She asked herself in perplexity:

solely on who happens to be paying court to them. Julie was offended and
If we unite both these kinds of history, as is done by the newest
pain, must, he thought, have some effect on others too.

fatherland—something senseless, masculine, and obstinate which there
hound could be heard.
On the other question, how the battle of Borodinó and the preceding
that Napoleon did not sit well or firmly in the saddle. The battalions
and the two girls were to sleep on some hay on the floor.
“All right, all right!” he said to Prince Andrew, and turned to a
approach, but even in this room there now stood an empty bath, and water
dying father. “It is painful, but it does one good. It uplifts the
“But the best of it was,” said one, telling of the misfortune of
them on some errand. She seemed to be trying whether any of them would
a marriage between their children and had received a favorable answer
soldiers—ill-shod, insufficiently clad, and half starved—who within a
not been so tall, so broad of limb, and so strong that he carried his
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
serve her as before and obey her in everything.
“It’s that protégé of yours, that sweet Princess Drubetskáya,

Petersburg, plans which might very easily be realized. When he entered
Natásha ate of everything and thought she had never seen or eaten such
covered with hoarfrost to his eyebrows.
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
The horses also had been fed for a fortnight on straw from the thatched

the sight of the killed and wounded.
“You value your own pride and don’t wish to apologize,” continued
felt happy in the mere consciousness of life—returned to his memory, not
smile.
really, that evening, Sónya was brighter, more animated, and prettier
Each instrument—now resembling a violin and now a horn, but better
who commits such a crime always knows just where that welfare lies. And
Napoleon about whose moral qualities opinions differ widely, history
way to Moscow and they still did so at the end of the battle as at the
“I have not referred to this out of curiosity, my dear sir, but for
and perspiring necks, and their shirts opening from the left toward


“The countess told me to inquire whether your excellency was at
And Natásha rose and went out of the room on tiptoe, like a ballet
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project

dress with two fingers, and blowing and shaking something off it, as if
universe, and of the courage with which he should endure toils and
the soldier. “Turn back with your slut!”
to a different world and who could not know and understand his past. As
How d’ye do, old fellow?” he said, turning to an old man who was
submit from habit, and she said: “I wish only to do your will, but if
Unexpectedly, in the middle of the service, and not in the usual order
“And you won’t feel ashamed to write to him?”
one moment prayed to God as he had done on the battlefield at the bridge
makes us see beauty. It is only Malvínas and women of that kind who are
darkness, the man paused, then moved with cautious steps toward the

with her and picked up her reticule and drove out with her. How did it
Napoleon slightly turned his head, and put his plump little hand out
“Whose calèche is that?” she inquired, leaning out of the carriage
come over because he had been slighted in the service: that he ought
In the hut which the men had passed, the chief officers had gathered and

troops from Russian territory, I will regard what has passed as not
of the campaign is quite rightly considered by the French to be a
nose, intimating that he did not understand him either, and moved,


During the movement of the Russian army from Tarútino to Krásnoe it
Pétya.
Dessalles; the rest of the day she spent over her books, with her old



but Anna Pávlovna—who was in the excited condition of a commander on
And Princess Mary tried, but could not manage, to be cordial to her new
And by old habit he asked himself the question: “Well, and what then?

everyone ducked. It flopped into something moist, and the general fell
and sniffing at her singed hair. The woman’s husband, a short,

your father is rich, I don’t regard myself as a relation of his, and
old prince to her.
common good turned out to be useless and foolish—like Pierre’s and

same instant he was dazzled by a great flash of flame, and immediately a
In spite of her one desire to see her brother as soon as possible, and
“But you must decide on something! Your father expects it.”
“Just once more,” said a girlish voice above him which Prince Andrew

things possible which the commanders of the big detachments did not dare
After inspecting the carriage himself and seeing the trunks put in, he
soldier. They called him “little falcon” or “Platósha,” chaffed him
“Mamma, your cap, more to this side,” said Natásha. “I’ll
That act is performed.

“better late than never” on his lips.

young man can inspire in a romantic and loving young girl like yourself.
everything will be possible for our order, which has already in secret

sounded. Several of our men fell, among them the round-faced officer

else, runs upstairs and does up her hair and wags her tail and is unlike
As she entered the ballroom her father was hurriedly coming out of
of the action, but all these reports were false, both because it was

said Prince Andrew who had not yet had time to eat anything.
the judges wished the answers of the accused to flow so as to lead to
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
him that there would probably be an engagement that day or the next, and
here made the inquiries. The proclamation had passed through exactly

“Well, my dear fellow, so you still want to be an adjutant? I have


men! Enough! Cease... bethink yourselves! What are you doing?”
CHAPTER XI

frock and hair.


Pierre went to Princess Mary’s to dinner.
his house which had not been burned. He called on Count Rostopchín and
streamed out of a side street.
Toward dawn, Count Orlóv-Denísov, who had dozed off, was awakened by a
urging on his horse, which ambled smoothly under his weight, and he
irrepressible, kindly, elderly laughter.
“For the peace that is from above, and for the salvation of our souls.”

in Perkhúshkovo, he learned that there had been a great battle that

The soldier to whom the laughers referred was Dólokhov. Prince Andrew
straight and strong at sixty as at thirty.
    * “Are you the master here?”

tears for his fellow men, for himself, and for his own and their errors.
“I’m not like that myself, but I understand. So you’re not angry with
and their stories, and all came to look at the wolf, which, with her
after the soup the prince became more genial.

really did.
“Ah, Váska!” joyfully replied Nesvítski. “What’s up with
his Serene Highness had petted and to whom he had given a lump of sugar
in.”
“Always thoughts... about you... thoughts...” he then uttered much
artillery sentry was pacing up and down; he stood at attention when the
they took the Saltánov dam or not, as we are told was the case at
missed them. They have gone to your estate near Moscow.”

he would give an opinion at the war council which would be the only one
and powder. The cannon balls flew just as swiftly and cruelly from both
“To your health!” said Balagá who also emptied his glass, and wiped his
she was now saying she had talked of before, with tears.

“Yes, a new happiness was revealed to me of which man cannot be
felt that the elder hussar’s luckless love for Natásha played a part
evident that he never considered what he had said or was going to say,


elderly face, and she took the money from under the handkerchief.

by Genlis and the French proverbs, and because his voice shook when he
soldiers had enjoyed, and the impatience to do what they had been
and fuss about an authentic Scotch carpet and a charter that nobody
the staff had of late been exceedingly strained. Ermólov had been to
A man who would have been afraid ten years before of going every day
drawing room with her habitual skill. The large group, in which were
and went up into the porch of a large country house which had remained
“Well, listen, Balagá! Drive all three to death but get me there in
Seeing, on the other side, some Cossacks (les Cosaques) and the
said he with a sense of shame and wishing to change the subject. “I
said it was nonsense for he had just come from the Rostóvs’. He asked
“You speak to the colonel about this nasty business before other
Denísov.
On the twenty-ninth of November Kutúzov entered Vílna—his “dear Vílna”

the details of how Métivier and Feller had not understood the symptoms,
“What? His Serene Highness? I expect he’ll be here soon. What do you

“Tell me, you did not know of the countess’ death when you decided to
Anatole and Dólokhov liked Balagá too for his masterly driving and
continued Prince Vasíli, returning to his theme, apparently not

The countess, sobbing heavily, hid her face on her daughter’s breast,
had been killed or not and whether the cannon had been captured or
an advantageous peace, or in case of a refusal make a menacing move on
the count and at Anna Mikháylovna, the latter very adroitly turned
along the old Smolénsk road, the destruction of the invading army of
under the apron of which his feet were sticking out, and in the middle
to the window.
walked slowly without raising his pistol, looking intently with his
from the wood, mustered the men who were woodcutting, and, allowing the
At ten o’clock the infantry that had been among the bushes in front of
    CHAPTER VIII


she thinking about? Why is she so glad?”
road. The higher the sun rose the higher rose that cloud of dust, and
know whether Count Bezúkhov had left or was leaving the town.
people. At that time there was in France a man of genius—Napoleon. He
heart of gold to which I know no equal. He has realized, it seems to me,

“However, there will hardly be an engagement today,” said Bagratión
In Julie’s set, as in many other circles in Moscow, it had been agreed
secrets.
patience), and only then will he be a brave leader. God forbid that he
warm themselves, gathering round the fires throwing into the flames the
fancied he really had said it. “But they insisted on their own view:
them threw down its arms and surrendered as it had long been anxious to

that in the Otrádnoe avenue and at the window that moonlight night
reaches the moving vessel, and suddenly the administrator, instead
that he decided to go. The thought immediately occurred to him that his
either perish or put an end to the misery of all Europe—which it seemed

tidied up.”
Borís inquired what news there might be on the staff, and what, without
the law of God,” the voice had said. “Simplicity is submission to the

bore almost the same smile, expressing unseemly thoughts about the
“Forfeit, forfeit, forfeit!”
went out of the hut in which he was billeted with Nesvítski and began

inner voice told her that now or never her fate would be decided, and

doubt of victory, especially on this day when what is at stake is the

day, ordered the standards that had been captured to be lowered at the
and had grown accustomed to him. Métivier came to see the prince about
which an enormous map of the environs of Brünn was spread out.
Borodinó to the left of, and at a right angle to, the highroad (that
treated Bonaparte as an equal and that the latter was quite at ease with
reflections. And experience tells us that power is not merely a word but
For Borís, Julie played most doleful nocturnes on her harp. Borís


      a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   k
my tea.”
Alexander’s will—such as the activity of Stein, Metternich, Madame de
“Come! Come with me, we’ll have a talk,” said he.
they wanted to show they were drunk and on a spree. One, a tall,

her turn began thinking aloud. Her thoughts were about the children.
*—as Alexander expressed it in the last letter he wrote him—he had never
in Petersburg” was so well established that no one took his freaks
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
a cone and of the ranks of an army, or the ranks and positions in
feet. Where is Alexander now, and of what is he thinking? A strange,
“Oooh! For Christ’s sake let me alone!” cried the wounded man, but
During the two days that elapsed before Rostóv called, Princess Mary

soldier with a wagon, who was pressing onto the infantrymen who were
“We ourselves will not delay to appear among our people in that Capital
Rostóv glanced angrily at Ilyín and without replying strode off with
clavichord was. “It’s no use your going to the commander in chief.

thin face was now quivering with nervous excitement; his eyes, in which
general patted him on the shoulder, with a smile.
CHAPTER XVIII
did not wait to be called. The shapely figure of the fair-haired
“One more question, Count,” he said, “which I beg you to answer
to drive on the carts that blocked the way.
without muskets who, holding up the skirts of their overcoats, were
“The devil only knows what they’re about!” muttered Denísov.
occupy is a strong one, and while they are marching to go round me on
Petersburg. But now this head was swaying helplessly with the uneven
a chosen man, and guided the will of that chosen man so as to accomplish
unconscious little princess, he shook his head reprovingly and slammed
He sat down by his wife, his elbows on his knees and his hands ruffling
city. Fires were visible on all sides. He did not then realize the
distressed that his stout and clumsy body took up so much room and doing
which ancient historians regarded as representing the progress of
cannot be imagined or adequately praised!” said Berg, glancing round
Mother keep you in their holy and all-powerful care!
Sometimes they were silent for hours; sometimes after they were already
“I am not jesting with you; please be silent!” cried Bolkónski,
Pétya replied that he wanted the French lad who had been captured that


talking to the corporal immediately asked what the Frenchman had said.
battles. He did nothing harmful to the progress of the battle; he
À propos of marriages: do you know that a while ago that universal
would laugh at him, and thrust his head into the shirt hurriedly. None
without being dull or angry, was silent, thoughtful, and preoccupied.




his own softened and uplifted soul, now blossoming into a new life.
their energies. Beyond a certain limit no mechanical disruption of the
surprise at Pierre’s huge stout figure and listened to his talk of
Anatole was with the countess. The countess’ drawing room was full of
not wish to relate because it seemed to him not worth telling. He
so as to be less exposed to fire. After this from amid the ranks of
“What a darling our Papa is!” she cried, kissing him, and she again

natural justice.”
available: some horses were carting for the government, others were too
“simpler.” Terénty, when he had helped him undress and wished him good
On the twenty-ninth of May Napoleon left Dresden, where he had spent
And like a practical Petersburg lady who knows how to make the most of
“There’s one thing I don’t understand,” he continued. “Who
“My dear fellow, what have you been up to in Moscow? Why have you
like people who, recognizing the defects of paper money, decide to
not be confounded in our hope of Thy mercy, and give us a token of Thy
tea talked of the price of corn, the crops, and the good weather for
difficult and assumed more definite forms.
mess!”
again, speaking as some third, collective, male person. “Pretty,
street, something exploded, and the street was shrouded in smoke.
Though five minutes before, Prince Andrew had been able to say a few
sorrow, that all the old misunderstandings should sink into nothing but


reliable source that Prince Vasíli has sent his son to Moscow to get
belief is natural and agreeable to traders, agriculturists, and soldiers
easy to take marshals, sitting on a sofa by the fire! That is true, but
their surrender, wasted time, and did not do what he was ordered to do.
the rows of hay are lying in the hollow, there’s the bridge. That’s our



approached him, and kissed him, weeping.
vreatening Russia and zat ze safety and dignity of ze Empire as vell

But Rostóv bowed himself away from the doctor and asked the assistant
“I was very much surprised when I heard of it,” said Prince Andrew.
line, and (on the Russian side) as to luring the enemy into the depths
them all,’” Tíkhon concluded, looking cheerfully and resolutely into

Pierre was agitated and undecided. Natásha’s unwontedly brilliant eyes,
de-tra-va-ga-la” he sang.
hope... but it will depend on her....”
her old nurse and the maidservants who came running toward her.
continually glanced at him. On growing used to the darkness Pierre saw

diplomatists and monarchs nearly quarreled and were on the point of

in any other way that he had the right, since he had the might.
done. He must respond in kind.”
such gratefully religious ones, with offerings of icons and the bread
the deceptions, robberies, and murders which would have to be committed
result of the battle to be fought in a few days.
“There, you see how strangely fate has brought us together,” said he,
ordered was done.
and harvested so early and so well, or got so good a return, as did

with a more tranquil mind.
“You don’t seem to be used to riding, Count?” remarked the adjutant.
“It may be he or it may be nothing,” muttered the hussar. “It’s
little Napoleon had suddenly appeared with his unsympathizing look of

water is running on my seat! I’ll go and look for shelter. The rain

“Well, I did not expect you, I am very glad,” said Prince Andrew.
right, it is advantageous to attack the enemy’s latter wing especially
that sum. “He’s begun to go a little lame on the left foreleg,” he
to get away: at that moment she hated the stiff, elderly princess, who
well again now, isn’t she?” Julie asked Pierre with a knowing smile.
unloading, once started, could not be arrested. It seemed not to matter
“You heard probably of the heroic exploit of Raévski, embracing his two
“Sire, all Paris regrets your absence,” replied de Beausset as was

to a footman dressed in knee breeches, shoes, and a swallow-tail coat,
the center of the Russian army, and that that center was already
stolen from me. In that reunion of great sovereigns we should have

    CHAPTER VI
nephew, General Chatróv an old war comrade of the prince’s, and
sarcastic smile.
With regard to religion, Napoleon ordered the priests to be brought back
his actions. He employed all his ability and strength to do the best he
jumped out quickly. The count got out helped by the footmen, and,
Rhetor, though it aroused his curiosity, did not seem to him essential,
half-contemptuous smile on his lips, scarcely touching the peak of his


or appreciative according to the way the joke was received. Everybody
boy’s tutor, and how and where to let him know immediately. Before


there,” and he pointed to the village in front of them with the white

“But on what then?”
seated without looking at one another.
who, jesting and laughing, stared at their strange foreign enemies.

feeling that in the main it was going badly.
“She went. Suddenly there was a great wind. The girl lost her hat and

times whether N. and S. were members of our lodge (a question to which I
“It’s Andrew!” thought Princess Mary. “No it can’t be, that
“Corporal, what will they do with the sick man?...” Pierre began.
to man which he had first experienced at the first halt outside
room, addressed Pierre.
screams came.
The day after the review, Borís, in his best uniform and with his
Excellency Prince Vasíli Kurágin and his son, I understand?” she

    CHAPTER III
stranger was.
matters. To Pierre’s timid look of inquiry after reading the letter she
and after a short pause added: “Yes, it’s Scythian warfare. It’s all

presence and particularly distinguished himself.”


sunny. She could understand nothing, think of nothing and feel nothing,
description. The old man began to sing, in the cracked voice of old age:
Streets. No masters of the houses being found anywhere, the French were
match in Russia, had sunk greatly in the esteem of society after his
ancestor of the Bolkónskis. Prince Andrew, looking again at that
of strings inside a carriage, thinks he is driving it.

winning a battle was unprecedented. He alone during the whole retreat

“Was it from the cold?” asked someone.

Hélène, and that thought both alarmed him, as if some obligation were
But the roll of the drums did not make the looting soldiers run in the
ever have thought!...”
told them all that.
not expect you today,” he added. “I only sent you the note yesterday
“this is absurd! Come, let go I tell you.”
“Yes, Mamma! Yes, these are very hard times!” said Berg.
early in the morning of the first of September, orderlies and servants
himself as the possessor of those Pénza and Nizhegórod estates and
had to be made ashamed of their visits to the French theater and aroused

code, but under this unwritten law. He felt now that merely by having

voice trembled.) “I loved your father... and she will make you a good
in my hands and is clear and definite in my head. When the time comes to
of her children, and sharing every moment of her husband’s life, she had

They told her where the barn was and how she should stand and listen,
hostility but yet with respect, in the guardhouse to which he was taken.
Anna Mikháylovna’s face expressed a consciousness that the decisive
feel like it, she became enthusiastic in order not to disappoint the
the tale of the merchant who suffered innocently, there was now an

twitching, and it was impossible to tell whether he understood what was
that sort of thing.”
they stumbled and panted with fatigue, perspiring and stained with blood
found her nephew there with his tutor, and a letter from Prince Andrew
Vasílich is worn out. Just you wait a bit!”

that he now protected himself from the danger of its repetition, first
in Petersburg is this: the Emperor does not look into anything. He
princess had been crying after dinner and had spoken of her forebodings



“I have had a proposition made me concerning you,” he said with an
in a shady corner by the window.
rattle on the bridge as if nuts were being spilt, and the hussar nearest



at certain hours, though she declared that no medicine would cure her
everything that took place and was reported to him was exactly what he
impetuously at the wolf from in front and almost knocked her over. But
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
Pierre went in at the door, stepping on the soft carpet, and noticed
questioning him about political affairs and news. He seemed to listen
he said. “Perhaps you are right for yourself,” he added after

“I... I didn’t think of it. I never promised, because...”

During his service, chiefly as an adjutant, Prince Andrew had seen the
“But for heaven’s sake listen to me!”
verbal activity.
the actions of the mass to the will of one man, would have found it
icon. Well, and what do you think? He received his sight! It’s a sin
indicate how profoundly he valued and comprehended the Emperor’s words.
“I tell you,” shouted Denísov, “he’s a fine fellow.”
else’s borzois. He hoped to become better acquainted with the count
behind himself—who never left the country—in knowledge of what was
him... Olga, go and see whether Uncle’s beef tea is ready—it is
But when he mentioned the Rostóvs, Princess Mary’s face expressed still


be heard, subdued by suffering and broken by sobs.
The dull, sleepy expression was no longer there, nor the affectation
brought her up. To sacrifice herself for others was Sónya’s habit. Her
“love a man once for all and remain true to him forever? That is what
But to his surprise Willarski soon noticed that Pierre had lagged much

avenue from the house at Bald Hills. “She, poor innocent creature, is
him. That’s a thing I hate! Everything is possible.”
“Having a good time? Well, I’m glad of it!”

to him that it could not be otherwise, and that it would be a bad thing

did not suit her faded features, always played round her lips expressed,
Pierre gazed at the door through which she had disappeared and did not
considered it proper to show an interest in the general conversation by
He was as careful of the sowing and reaping of the peasants’ hay
onto the Kalúga road.
of life, the arrangement of the day so as to be in time everywhere,
his reign and during 1812, but acted badly by giving a constitution
“I love you more, better than before,” said Prince Andrew, lifting her
“Tomorrow very likely I may be sent with some message to the

    CHAPTER IV

better. Oh, she is certainly the most charming woman in the world,” she
general who had served blamelessly for twenty-two years, flushed by a

The children and their governesses were glad of Pierre’s return because
monument from Moscow which he intended to erect in his own garden to his
pleased Pierre very much and he often asked himself what would put an


a bold, free, and easy tone, while in his soul he regarded himself as a

the waiter.
larger circle.
It seemed to her that not only did everybody know that her fate would be


Zdrzhinski, the officer with the long mustache, spoke grandiloquently of

The general frowned. Though there was no definite news of an Austrian
of affairs in the Russian army, but no one anticipated any danger of
said the countess. “But I am in great need of this sum.”
now before I am off duty. I’ll take another turn and when I get back
place.

being drenched by the rain, all looked black whether chestnut or bay.
clustered around him; all eyes turned on him, and he felt at once
The old man was already sitting barefoot. The little Frenchman had
tore it in doing so, and threw it away. An aide-de-camp behind him
are they doing? What are they doing?” he murmured to himself, still
Kazán, and the things belonging to these institutions had already been
that was at first hard to bear was his feet.
that both her slender bare arms clasped him above his neck, and, tossing
animation that had formerly burned there and constituted its charm.
the bed, pale and dry-eyed, and was gazing at the icons and whispering

only have had it from the Postmaster. But evidently they had come to
Karatáev generally lay down at the halting places, and when he smelled
tremulous voice to read the sheet from the beginning.


evenings for years, she regretted Julie’s presence and having no one
Balashëv, feeling it incumbent on him to reply, said that from the
desire to do so. A new sensation of comfort and relief came over him
Both the countess and Sónya understood that, naturally, neither Moscow
him with her usual smile.
considered important.
He was deaf and did not hear Prince Andrew ride up. He was sitting on
CHAPTER IV

the blackguards have looted.... There! See what that one has behind

national war. And only that feeling placed him on that highest human
“Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?” Natásha again cried

Paulucci, whom he had known in Turkey, into the drawing room where the
With Sónya’s help and the maid’s, Natásha got the glass she held


he could not stop short for the sake of one man’s life.”
“Princess, for God’s sake!” he exclaimed, trying to stop her.
That arousing of the people by their sovereign and his call to them to
us that from the commencement of the campaign a Scythian war plan was
to take such a step without father’s or mother’s consent! And now she’s
She spent the night of the fourteenth as usual, without undressing, in
tender filial affection with the majestic benevolence of a monarch. He
“No,” answered Pierre, evidently not considering awkward the meaning
“Dear me!” said Rostóv.
people, Cossacks, and a traveling carriage of the Governor’s. At the
Pierre glanced at him with amazement, unable to understand what he
feet in low shoes, Iogel flew first across the hall with Natásha, who,
Dron replied that the horses of these peasants were away carting.
has come down to us from the remotest ages, even from the first man—a

Moldavia and Wallachia; I would have given your sovereign those
rather mysterious power.
appear, so that she concentrated them wholly on that one thing and yet

CHAPTER XI


Dunyásha noticed her smiling as she looked out of the carriage window.
face and narrow little eyes beamed with self-satisfied merriment. He

children. The nearer the time came for Pétya to return, the more uneasy
but of angry resolve.
believe it! Natásha, have you considered what these secret reasons can

“Then she is here still?” said Prince Andrew. “And Prince Kurágin?” he
value of paper money arise either because, being easy to make, too much
straight to me. Good-by, my dear boy.”
you don’t know! Be so good as to ride to General Barclay and inform
having stuck an amber mouthpiece far into his mouth, was inhaling the
ten thousand people were still in Moscow on the first and second of
advancing to attack the French cavalry that was coming to meet them.
question presented itself to her: did she love him?


In the summer of 1809 Pierre returned to Petersburg. Our Freemasons knew
“Well, and how is Prince Alexander to blame? He is a most estimable
and did her hair, her ill-chosen words, and her jealousy—she was jealous
good-naturedly, and sent him on errands. But to Pierre he always
CHAPTER III
And he sat down again, paying no more attention to his daughter, who was
In the village through which they passed there were red lights and a
sitting in a conspicuous place and talking to him like a grown-up lady.

of his appearance before her now. Prince Andrew went round the sofa and
“It’s horrid! It’s abominable!” she screamed. “You can’t possibly have
As is always the case at a departure, much had been forgotten or put in
his head.
hide the traces of their guilt as quickly as possible.
differently. Prince Andrew had thought and said that happiness could

stranger.
with his black horses over the winter rye to the place reserved for him,
imperials ... or do you wish to make it a hundred?” added he,
“You don’t understand why I say this,” he continued, “but it is
over and over again would weary anyone.
    CHAPTER XII
the ranks, and above all being unable to see anything in front or around
with happy face and sparkling eyes, raised his saber, shouted “Vivat!”
In the house that poetic dullness and quiet reigned which always
Hélène understood that the question was very simple and easy from
on the state of their affairs and with advice and suggestions that they
recognized in civilian dress, came to Tilsit and went to the lodging

her, she recovered from her mental sickness just as suddenly and became
go!”
soldier shouted to him. “They’d kill you there!”
“With young Count Peter, by the Zhárov rank grass,” answered Simon,
other children up, telling him that I did not love him. For a long time
have certainly acquired a taste for war, and it is just as well for me;
“Now, dear boy,” said Prince Vasíli playfully, “say ‘yes,’
“Why are you here?”
armies had suffered in the former war from Austerlitz to Wagram. But

orders. Not one of these was, or could be, carried out.
phrases. “Look, Anna Timoféevna,” she added to her companion, “see what
breathing, her movements, her beauty. Then it would suddenly seem to him


over the earthwork.
the entrenchment, and went on again. Just behind it they came upon some
tall as they. It was an enormous tree, its girth twice as great as a
prepare him to take on himself the whole responsibility for what is
weak human understanding cannot grasp, it seems to me rather useless to
addressing the black-mustached Denísov with servile deference.
(He smiled ironically.) “But even if he also took up a position in
hope you will change your opinions, my dear Monsieur Pierre.”
he suddenly asked himself when he was already near the green ammunition
soldier and the gay and smartly marching men. In the second file
“O, Lord Jesus Christ!” she murmured.


gave him no answer. Now I recalled every detail of that meeting and in

minds, and they realized that they were both children of humanity and
Without changing his careless attitude, Pierre looked at them over his
something not quite right about this intended marriage.

youth upwards has been occupied with learning: that is, with books and
alive, had suddenly been wrenched out and everything had collapsed
period, nor would there have been any contradictions.
him! Do you understand?’ he says. That’s how it is, dear fellow. Fate
battalion, and when a brave officer was needed he was chosen.
right flank and drive it into the Bohemian mountains according to plan,


went on, and then paused (“Do you see,” shouted the youth victoriously,
The whole household, as if to atone for not having done it sooner, set
with them, shouts of delight and triumph arose among the young men.
evening, he went into the large division of the tent at three o’clock in
wrapped in the shawl was Morel, his orderly.

to him presented a majestic and agreeable spectacle. But the visitors

On the fourth day fires broke out on the Zúbovski rampart.
“Prince Andrew’s? We shall pass it and I’ll take you to him.”
Pétya pulled him by the arm to attract his attention.

Natásha alone, yet the cares of life demanded her attention and she

firmly resolved to answer his father-in-law. Moreover, the words of the
running, out to the porch carrying candles.

so kann man gewiss nicht den Verlust der Privat-Personen in Achtung

love and pain, and he suddenly realized that she was right and that he
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost

frowned, and left the room with an expression of cold dignity.
brushed head. He looked at the Rostóvs from under his brows and said
her album. Borís sketched two trees in the album and wrote: “Rustic


Petersburg plan) special hopes had been placed by the Russians, and
her, and this observation helped to calm her.
anything living; but it was obvious that he failed to understand, not
Unconsciously she immediately invented a reason for going down, and
leave of her and of Lise, his look tender yet proud. She saw him tender
fur coat said that the mistress asked him to come to her bedroom.
suddenly Sónya pushed away the glass she was holding and covered her
and ‘To Siberia!’” said Berg with a sagacious smile. “I knew I


always cheerful, satisfied, and serene. What wouldn’t I give to be like
what was approaching in the distance from the opposite side—the blue
Borís with severity. “I am glad.... Are you here on leave?” he went

“Please, your excellency, for God’s sake!” he kept saying,
irritated at being continually disturbed.

“Stop that!” cried Alpátych sternly. “I see through you and three yards

by the insoluble question whether she loved Anatole or Prince Andrew.
But by the time this letter, which proved that the real relation of
sat facing Bagratión and, as the very personification of Moscow



men’s opinions and their lives, and between one man and another, pleased
their doubts and excite their imagination, giving them a bent for
It was St. Natalia’s day and the name day of two of the Rostóvs—the
he always continued to suffer. I said it then only because it would have
One of these, a nimble little man, was wearing a blue coat tied round
for him, but again pressed on him so that they jammed his leg, and those


idea that there is not and cannot be any science of war, and that
The kindhearted countess was the more vexed with Sónya because that

A stout major was pacing up and down the line, and regardless of the
not speak. The regiment was also a home, and as unalterably dear and
Catherine Petróvna did actually play valses and the écossaise, and
to Rostóv and involuntarily riveted his attention, made a gesture of
Alpátych kept meeting and overtaking baggage trains and troops on the
then, if it must be!” and she slammed the casement.
senility by a tendency to fall asleep, forgetfulness of quite recent
be heard from all sides. A carriage that followed the escort ran
alone was of course sufficient. The novelty of Truth endowed her with
two!...” said Pierre, and a silence followed: “three!” and a rapturously
“I’m not such a fool.... Just you try it on.... Allez-vous

never felt till that moment. She ran out sobbing into the garden and as
approached the door of the minister’s room. He felt offended, and
Though Mademoiselle Bourienne had been so unsuccessful in her choice

“They’ve withdrawn the front line, it has retired,” said they, pointing
and especially to catch the incendiaries who, according to the general
“If she goes to her cousin first and then to another lady, she will be
energetic readiness for action and resistance. His feet were bare.

one, a young soldier, his face deadly pale, his shako pushed back, and

“It is he, it is he, Nicholas!” said Countess Mary, re-entering the room
the walls, and a big fly flopped at the head of the bed and around the
do with the justice or injustice of other people? She had to endure and
mine is yours,” she concluded, scanning the faces before her.
the war is over, if I am still alive and still loved by you, I will


Anna Mikháylovna, who always knew everything that passed in the house,
exasperated with one another and, long after the action had begun on
shows him to us.
any case be renewed.

A minute later the marshal’s adjutant, de Castrès, came in and conducted

where he stood.
They were taking fifty-four hounds, with six hunt attendants and
where he had not been for a long time past. He went up to the gate.

where we are really going in the darkness, and that we shall arrive and
without themselves knowing whether they do it with friendly or hostile
always feel at their trial, perplexity as to why these questions were

“Well, he’s really a good fellow, one can serve under him,” said
write that in Petersburg he is spoken of as one of the most active,

other was mortgaged and the interest so much in arrears that it would
Before dawn he had slept for a few hours, and refreshed, vigorous, and
poor, and they intrigue, the Astraea Lodge against the Manna Seekers,
“Well, little countess; that’s it—come on!” cried “Uncle,”


his head.
“You see,” he suddenly said, “I am a kinsman of the count’s and he has
leave his room and admitted no one but Mademoiselle Bourienne and

    CHAPTER XII
submitted to him by his marshals, and personally giving commands to his

not because of Napoleon’s orders but by their own volition. The whole
place and everything waiting for him in the Archives Department! Isn’t
“Who is it you want?” he asked. “The commander in chief? He was
dinner!... And there, look at this.... Well, my boy,” the old prince
Pelagéya Danílovna, having given orders to clear the rooms for the
usual formalities he left the lodge and went home.

“Have you done this?” he said, pointing to some broken sealing wax and
escapade made everybody feel confused. Denísov blushed too, but smiled
impression. Whether Dolgorúkov and Weyrother, or Kutúzov, Langeron,
“I don’t know about that, eh?” said Anatole, growing more confident as
repellent. Yet in this very repugnance to all his circumstances Pierre

“But above all Denísov must not dare to imagine that I’ll obey him and

attitude.
circle of Hélène and Rumyántsev the reports of the cruelty of the
door rows of brightly lit boxes in which ladies sat with bare arms and
be, she felt that she had to employ her diplomatic tact.
having killed so many people (they even exaggerate the number), and they
it’s magical, isn’t it?”
and would dispute and shout at the council, beating his breast and

the cannon—still agitated as before by the thought of the Emperor and by

and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in
governesses, lived three miles from the Rostóvs.
by Borís arrived at the palace to find Dolgorúkov. Everyone at
why she had to die, and in what way that death was but an expression

draped over one shoulder, came into the space left vacant for her, and

touch, “you promised me!”
and everyone rushed forward in one direction. Pétya was being pressed so
and, lurching with his whole body and puckering his face with the
they wish, so ready to be fond of him—for being his father—and of

cloth, which contrasted with the others. “What have you been after?
life, which seemed to him so beautiful now that he had today learned to
speak and to attract their attention, he got up, but at that moment his

recognized the Tsar and watched his approach. When he was within twenty
inevitability in themselves, and then ranging the phenomena of life
Papa, which Natásha, and which Pétya. Everyone shouted, talked, and
evident are the laws of that movement. To discover and define those laws
happens solely for the attainment of their sheepish aims; they need only
he had seen when he had gone out for provisions.

had given up to him.
distinctly, but as often happens had not understood a word of what they
yes, I remember you with the standard!” said Kutúzov, and a flush of

The staff captain, Kírsten, had twice been reduced to the ranks for
mouths. When they passed through a village they all rushed to the wells
Passing between the companies that had been eating porridge and drinking
body.

She had in fact seen nothing then but had mentioned the first thing that
improved without my having noticed it. And above all, what tact and

And Borís, having apparently relieved himself of an onerous duty and
a dramshop, came drunken shouts and songs. On benches round the tables


clatter among the audience, and with rapturous faces everyone began
superintendent had said, and looking at the departing trap.

The countess was a woman of about forty-five, with a thin Oriental type
the bright August sunshine and the bells sounded merrily. One of the
Monsieur Buonaparte sitting on a throne and granting the petitions of
distinctions which may infringe equality. Fly to a brother’s aid
changed his sleeping place every day. One day he would order his camp
put them into the wing, the men’s room, or the nurse’s room, we must ask

reversed. From behind them came the sound of church singing.
in his hand. This room had probably been a music room; there was still
excusing herself, she went to the door of the old prince’s room. The


correct. Alpátych was not at home, he had gone to the police. Neither
These men, carried away by their passions, were but blind tools of the
“Nikólenka... wounded... a letter,” she announced in gleeful
The troops were moving on, leaving about ten thousand wounded behind
what to do with his hands; he was more accustomed to walk over a plowed
be scraped together, others disputed that opinion and maintained that

Pétya. Besides that, he sent greetings to Monsieur Schelling, Madame
others, the chanters relit their censers, and service began. The hot
columns and guns. Our advanced line, already in action, could be heard
did not let him and, on the other, Pierre himself feared to begin to
something on the candlestick.
evident. Prince Andrew talked incessantly, arguing now with his father,
audibly that the coachman asked him:
continued to shout.
meditatively and rapidly:




From the time the law of Copernicus was discovered and proved, the mere
reserve tomorrow,” he thought. “I’ll ask leave to go to the front,
at this point, evidently not liking the officer’s remark, interrupted

What did you commit by so acting? A venial, or a mortal, sin? A venial
been vicious only because he had somehow forgotten how good it is to
Rostóv too, bending over his saddle, shouted “Hurrah!” with all his
Princess Mary. “Call Drónushka.”
men as well as bad,” said he, and still speaking, he turned on his knees
Benefit performances, poor pictures, statues, benevolent societies,
avoided inquiries and tried to assure himself that nothing particularly
mother. The countess finished her prayers and came to the bed with a

CHAPTER VIII



was filling her soul, there could be rich people and poor, and the rich
that, even more than in Moscow, he felt a sense of bewilderment, bustle,
matter—has the question of the freedom of will been put on a level on

man in a white hat were seen coming toward the officers.
swiftly moving legs and the shadows of the troyka they were passing.
In her absence Nicholas allowed himself to give his little daughter a
about him, brightening everything around by his glance. He spoke a few
losing strength every day and thought that a change of scene and the
stopped short, flushed till he perspired, but still got out the words,

The foremost Frenchman, the one with the hooked nose, was already so
and definitely understood without any sense of contradiction, although
Dólokhov banged down the lid of his desk and turned to Anatole with an
he had long been convinced that it was impossible for him to make a
was. He asked his sister to forgive him for not having told her of his

proposals. Pfuel alone seemed to consider Napoleon a barbarian like

new guard—both officers and men—he was not as interesting as he had

“Natásha, he is no more, no more!”
he had alluded to had happened a few days before—a fight between the
believe you, you’re joking! In three days to forget everything and
and went in at the open door. There was no one in the anteroom; empty

quite heard.
cry of ulyulyu, and above the others rose Daniel’s voice, now a deep
“I have heard of such cases and know that His Majesty is very severe
action he did not understand but which was working well.
am in this condition.” She looked down at her expanded figure and in the
Tilsit.
In their rear, more than a mile from Mikúlino where the forest came
“But how can I?...”
their musical talent, to sing something. Natásha, who was treated as
“Where is he?” he inquired. And as he spoke he saw a young man coming
bleeding corpse begin rapidly to change places. Each one came
himself, so that she was not invited to dinners and evening parties. She
the princess gave orders to harness for her journey, the peasants had
standing on the tables, and still more was being brought in from the
some other people ran in and began dragging away the maiden who had been
Pierre did not reply and went out of the room.

self-confident? I believe all this—and suddenly Princess Mary will tell
the feeling he had noticed between his protégée Natásha and Prince
coat to get at his snuffbox.

Sónya. The countess was still unwell and unable to travel but it was

Prince Andrew felt that either the actions of Kutúzov’s army
the Cossacks) horses, saddles, horsecloths, and the like. All this had
slowly and steadily without hurry. At daybreak, however, those nearing
“So you’ve decided to go, Andrew?” asked his sister.



him, by him alone.”

the Cossacks rode past Pétya and Denísov. When they had all ridden by,

again on the sofa. They were silent for a while.

But instead of all that—here he was, the wealthy husband of an
Vasíli. “I know something about that. Don’t I? And you are still so
report to “the old gentleman” the position of affairs on the left flank
The count burst out laughing. The other guests seeing that Shinshín


victory, and General Bennigsen, hoping to receive from Petersburg the
came over his face. He said nothing to her but looked at her forehead
straight into his son’s face with keen eyes which seemed to see
horses; I told Yákov Alpátych so.”
came up to them, called their carriage, and helped them in. As he was
intervention in human affairs, want to see the cause of events in
Again Natásha’s body shook with sobs.
continued, following an unconscious sequence of ideas.
“Why don’t you play?” he asked.
The third order was: General Campan will move through the wood to seize
a dog!... There, it has beaten them all, the thousand-ruble as well as
One desperate, frightened yell from the first French soldier who saw the

The lively song gave a special flavor to the tone of free and easy
to the right and who to the left? It is only because military men are
would be ordered. But she drove these thoughts away with disgust. Toward
The colonel looked silently at the officer of the suite, at the stout

and shining eyes and prayed God to help her.

blood. On seeing this, Pierre moved forward with his breast toward the
anything from them, often gave them the last of their rations.
barrels on her arms. You know not a day passes now without some new
represented her father and her brother gave her courage, and she boldly


under an invisible cap—to see what went on in the world. She was

He looked at the row of birches shining in the sunshine, with their
paces from him, a cannon ball tore up the dry earth and disappeared. A
(he had probably soiled them when he, too, had knelt before the icon),
met by recognizing a divinity which subjected the nations to the will of
growing ever stronger and fuller and merging into a deafening roar.

Véra, having decided in her own mind that Pierre ought to be
service is to serve under him.”
Hélène smiled, with a look implying that she did not admit the
genius, which, though concealed, was noticeable in every rejoinder.

would not be proper for her, in her deep mourning, to receive visitors;
the hussar shouted back.
architect not to go to the prince with his report.
Málo-Yaroslávets the field of conflict again remained theirs) without
gaily.
he had himself composed.
which language she always felt that her case did not sound quite clear,
against the pillow.
Catherine’s day, Count Bezúkhov, and about his illegitimate son
women have that dress can make a face pretty.
in attendance on him two of his servants, Terénty and Váska, who had
Denísov was looking at her with enraptured eyes.
keep from laughter provoked by a swarthy hussar officer who walked
and running so lightly, frightened Rostóv. He seized his pistol and,
Dolgorúkov to the Emperor.
of the pwovince of Moscow thinks fit, it can show its loyalty to our
Pfuel was evidently of that sort. He had a science—the theory of oblique

After that Anna Pávlovna led up to the courage and firmness of the King
moving, or of the winds of spring. To that I must entirely change my
in his heart his former love for her. Something in him had suddenly

“That’s not he himself, that’s the father of the fellow who wrote the
Milorádovich, who said he did not want to know anything about the
especially into the hands of that idiot Anatole, pained Borís. He drove
The major raised his hand to his cap with a smile.
remarked the old prince. “There in Petersburg they are always
and bad people, and with a tranquil conscience carried his head high.
of the field of Borodinó.
after visiting his estates had involuntarily found himself in a leading
and her friend, and how impossible it was for her to be anything like as
whether he was speaking in jest or in earnest. “Ah, your excellency!
She understood that he meant what were their parents quarreling about.
village. The colonel said that the commander of the division was a mile
dance) began to sound, all the doorways of the ballroom were suddenly
an assiduous and modest mien, and stooping over the outspread map


of Moscow by making any individual, or any group of people, responsible
evident that where they had expected to meet a single division there
impossible to wait for her recovery. Prince Andrew was expected in
men up.
running away, and looked at the messenger. Bolkhovítinov was bespattered

mirror there saw that she was pretty, very pretty, she felt even more
speaking playfully of a matter that evidently distressed him.

smile which caused Princess Mary to turn pale. “He’s worrying very much
eyebrows which, when he frowned, sometimes hid the gleam of his shrewd,

the gates and began pitching their camp in the Senate Square. Out of the
splendid field of oats in which a camp had been pitched and which
suitor. This memory carried him sadly and sweetly back to those painful

will throw you back beyond the Dvína and beyond the Dnieper, and will
threatened by the French) but at Brünn. Despite his apparently delicate
Bilíbin introduced him to the others.
Following Rostopchín’s example the others also rose.
Vasíli Dmítrich Denísov was staying with the Rostóvs this fifth of
in their primary form. The man who worked most with his hands could not

at that time, a very high ruffle, and a brown dress coat. This stout
unfortunate capacity many men, especially Russians, have of seeing and
understand what they are and who we are.”
suddenly... Why, you have only seen him three times! Natásha, I don’t
tears. She never cried from pain or vexation, but always from sorrow or
incessantly tortured by the thought of the dangers to which her brother,
to each other simply because the masses involved are equal or unequal.
little Natásha as grown up.
take me too? Who are these men?” thought Rostóv, scarcely believing

tormenting fear of death—the end—but now he no longer understood that
been told to report.
accounts a whole series of innumerable, diverse, and petty events, such
them all at one blow.
summer.
For that, only very simple and easy steps were necessary: not to allow
and could even sit up on the beds if one drew close to the table.
but as sorrow was manifest in every smile, the sound of every word, and
did when hunting, without reflecting or considering. He saw the dragoons
resulted from a mistake he made and looks for that mistake in the
burst out into a fit of his broad, good-natured laughter, so loud that
which Rostóv was serving.
moving to the door of the room assigned to him. The priest’s wife
else gives me that sense of soft tranquillity that you do... that light.
In the family’s feeling toward this wedding a certain awkwardness
his plight. But Simon was no longer there. He was galloping round by the
And latterly, to her surprise and bewilderment, Princess Mary

between Rúza and Mozháysk. Napoleon himself was in Moscow as late as

that comes to hand and strike with it till the feeling of resentment and
if to allow them a respite, a quarter of an hour passed during which
and radiant light.
should be a nice set of fellows if we were to wait about and so give him

Andrew, paying no more heed to the general who ran after him imploring
men as Klyucharëv. And I will knock the nonsense out of anybody”—but
“Le Roi de Prusse?” Hippolyte said interrogatively, again laughing,
indubitable, as indubitable as the deduction Voltaire made in jest
Often in afterlife Pierre recalled this period of blissful insanity. All
Now having come to the army, he informed Kutúzov of the Emperor’s
he patted Michaud on the shoulder. “You set me at ease, Colonel.”
marshal’s great weakness and failing health.
French, German, and Latin, blamed one another, and prescribed a great
Prince Andrew was on duty that day and in constant attendance on the
The invaders flee, turn back, flee again, and all the chances are now
But the smooth sea again suddenly becomes disturbed. The diplomatists
for him.
and severity.
two hostile armies was all the more clearly felt.

the cheeks, the same expression was on her charming childlike face with

Those who were in the dimly lit reception room spoke in nervous
nostrils and kissing it.
He nodded in answer to Balashëv’s low and respectful bow, and coming up
aiming at becoming commander in chief, unexpectedly employed his energy
him and demanded his participation.
ingratiate themselves with him, and it seemed to them all that he was
mother’s. We are at home on Thursdays—today is Thursday, so please come
occupied by troops. Bennigsen loudly criticized this mistake, saying

and yet long to cross that line, and know that sooner or later it must
report was heard, Bagratión looked round and shouted, “Hurrah!”
dependent on her and living in her house. She felt sorry for her
to a whole series of events but always to one moment only of an event.


our gaiety. But he would understand it all. Where is he now?” she
merchants, one of whom Pierre knew, a fat otkupshchík. The other was
victory. His Majesty will no doubt wish to see you, but not today. I
roused by activity, expected the best results from the new campaign,
by a German student in Vienna, and knew that the student had been shot.
dating from your childish days, and to see him so intimate with you may
himself took part in, trivial conversations, when he read or heard of
interests and intrigues as usual. Only in the very highest circles were
prohibited degrees of affinity. Despite all the terror of what had
“She must be a wonderful woman. A real angel!” he said to himself.
away.
continually fancied that either he would never come or that something

side of the question and you will see that your duty, on the contrary,
that the moment had come she was filled with dread of what she might
could see what I was like without you, how I suffered!”
founders.
to warn me of the humor my father is in. I do not allow myself to judge
peculiar form of beauty. Everyone brightened at the sight of this pretty
Túshin, who silent and smiling, shifting from one stockinged foot to
her, and she will be sure to smile and say: ‘How strange! He must be
everything and running away from home. In imagination she already
Krémlin, were thronging the Moskvá and the Stone bridges, a great many
“I knew,” thought Nicholas, “that I should never understand
sobs in her throat. Hard as she had tried to prepare herself, and now
Bagratión, knowing Bolkónski to be a favorite and trusted adjutant,

who does not know it. In all these cases the conception of freedom
soul, her whole being, into the subject that absorbed her, the larger

Natásha at that moment felt so softened and tender that it was not
must have an explanation...”
The little princess had also left the tea table and followed Hélène.
of the French were coming down upon them and that his regiment was in
the yell the officer turned round, and at the same moment Pierre threw
study.”
Alpátych went out. The prince again went to his bureau, glanced into it,
CHAPTER V
namely, that the course of human events is predetermined from on
“Do you like him?”
CHAPTER IV
father’s consent, and he could do the same, but that she would never
“That kind of amiable talk would be suitable from this young count of
began, had an opposite effect: the longer it continued and the greater



are quite different. That must be true. Really he is quite unlike him—in
But why did they not execute those maneuvers? And why if they were
Souza’s novels.”
Borodinó.
cost correct, or remedy, the mistake if he had made one, so that he,

when the Frenchman began to cry.
as it was too far to the left flank for him to have time to go there

Vasíli to Anna Mikháylovna. “Go and take something, my poor Anna
challenges him to a duel will that be all right? Eh?”
gave him a nickname (“our gentleman”), and made kindly fun of him among
“Very well, then!” shouted the little officer, undaunted and not


“If you, sir, choose to make a buffoon of yourself,” he said

that it had to be.
not agree with his limited understanding of what is good. Whether the
Pierre came early so as to find them alone.
had carried you off... do you think they wouldn’t have found him?
of them that she might pray for them. But neither could she doubt the
“Who do you want?”
he cried.
he had known from a child, with this new conception of her baseness,
in Petersburg and that a copy, which he had himself seen, had that day

a truce and sent his adjutant to Kutúzov to report the offer he had
them now! And yet really the anxiety is greater now than the joy. One is
expressed in the highest degree by the behavior of Chichagóv, who knew
new path so attractively shown him by the Masons, on which he firmly
which he always deceived himself. The question was whether he could ever
often did, and was glad when he heard someone coming.
“But I just wish to say, to avoid misunderstandings, that you are
During the whole of their march from Moscow no fresh orders had been
sat down at her writing table, on which stood miniature portraits and
MONSIEUR LE PRINCE KOUTOUZOV: I am sending one of my adjutants-general

night with us at Otrádnoe.”
movements of the Austrian army, and then give it to his excellency.”
fifty members of the English Club and fifty guests were awaiting the
“I have the honor to present myself,” repeated Prince Andrew rather
not to challenge Bolkónski. “Of course not!” he now thought. “Is
on which Rostóv sat.
speaking to, and saw the quartermaster, Topchéenko.
win, but if later, God knows what will happen.” Napoleon did not smile,


reading confirmation in Anna Mikháylovna’s face.
her sufferings or with their relief. The pangs began again and Mary
Pétya woke up.

The very question that had formerly tormented him, the thing he had
At daybreak on the seventeenth, a French officer who had come with
kind of talk, and at last all stopped. As often happens, the horses of
through the screen of its hot fine particles one could look with naked

increasing, seemed like someone’s breathing. He listened intently to
(none of them had eaten anything since morning), and yet more because he
a pleasant smile, respectfully asked his future father-in-law to let

“Has the snow been shoveled back?”
When Prince Andrew entered the study the old man in his old-age
One matter connected with his management sometimes worried Nicholas, and


“It’s as if a dam had burst,” said the Cossack hopelessly. “Are

Polish lady wished to elope with him, but, prompted by magnanimity, the
soft steps of the footmen. At one end of the table sat the countess with

or when the war or any general political affairs were discussed on the
return—at that moment she was more repulsive to him than ever—entered
liked her voice. She asked this and then became confused, feeling that
happy event in the family of the old Rostóvs. Count Ilyá Rostóv died
“We are Russians and will not grudge our blood in defense of our faith,
herself in difficulties owing to the boorishness of these people”—he
punishes disobedience and crime. Strict measures have been taken to
will certainly be granted. Pierre will get everything as the legitimate

confusion and fear that showed itself on Prince Vasíli’s face.
They dismounted and entered the tent. Several officers, with flushed and
“Ah, the letter? Yes...” replied the prince peevishly. “Yes... yes...”
    CHAPTER XVI

expression she did not understand, and lay down again. He was suffering
“Because I know it will end in nothing....”
to his father with a very flushed face and said in his breaking voice
gold only if it is serviceable not merely for exchange but also for use,
satisfaction in an uncomplaining endurance of his position. He tried
this place which teemed with life, nor could he even distinguish our
shading his eyes with his small hand.
the official side of the service. These gentlemen received Prince

have, my dear! I tasted it. The thousand rubles I paid for Tarás were
leader.” This is what historians of the first class say—those who assume
“Ah!” said the Emperor reassured, and with a kindly gleam in his eyes,
accountant, a stout, full-faced man, looked around him with a naïve
Francis received him standing in the middle of the room. Before the

vexations he derived from that world, to her so remote and alien. She
retained its own peculiarities and made concessions to the others. Every
a new white sphinx appeared, standing at the door. And that sphinx had
Pierre.
    CHAPTER XII
angrily, in a voice of despair and repressed irritation. Sónya burst
“No,” cried he, becoming more and more eager, “Napoleon is great
toward fulfilling Napoleon’s wish that it should be blown up when he

strange and ridiculous to meet objections from Russian generals and to
“Ah, Timókhin!” said he, recognizing the red-nosed captain who had
soft whispering voice incessantly and rhythmically repeating
Rostóv smilingly reassured the dragoon and gave him money.
of unexecuted orders of Napoleon’s one series, for the campaign of 1812,
church, walking about the room singing. She had her back to him when he
He said something more, but Rostóv did not wait to hear it and rode

Rostóv took the letter and, throwing the money on the sofa, put both

“Well, madam,” he began, stooping over the book close to his

In the miserable, sobbing, enfeebled man whose leg had just been

directed to—Pierre and Hélène. Prince Vasíli mimicked the sobbing
“Come now, this is stupid. What?” said Anatole, fingering a button of
When Princess Mary came down, Prince Vasíli and his son were already


with her beautiful eyes full of tears at the door through which Prince
whole face, as she had so often seen it in the stillness of the night
were being taken with them.)

with an old mother and a hunchback sister, and was the most affectionate

argument. But the law of history relates to man. A particle of matter
sat down with a book in the drawing room near the door through which she
pardon. As soon as Rostóv heard them, an enormous load of doubt
and the thirteenth of June was fixed for a ball, dinner, regatta, and



Balashëv bowed his head affirmatively.
whom hitherto he, like everyone else, had always called Buonaparte.



considered right was right, so now, after a short but sincere struggle
“Why are you going? I know you think it your duty to gallop back to


“Not at all, Mamma.”
I might move my serfs from Bald Hills to Boguchárovo or my Ryazán
true! Write an answer!”
turned to his wife.
toast, the count took out his handkerchief and, covering his face, wept
palace in a manner agreeable to yourself, and in so far as circumstances

not understand). The more we try to explain such events in history
with its famous arsenal so indispensable to the army, is in danger.

to read and write by the deacon, like your father and me. Now tell me,
“In the first place, Truníla is not a ‘dog,’ but a harrier,”

his nose, buttoning his coat, and, hastily stepping up, without a word
he felt himself to be. At the right beat of the music he looked sideways
village Elder, so Alpátych had not managed the prince’s estates for
to cry. Her tears were those of an offended child who does not know why
neatly glued floor, swept by the bees with the fanning of their wings,
“It is done!” she said to the count, pointing triumphantly to the
animated, and handsome, with his hand bandaged. In the study were four
his breast. Among them stood a man whose white shirt was stained with
And he did his work, giving his whole strength to the task.
“I want to teach this young man how to shoe a horse,” said
tears.
him that he was chosen to give a new direction to the whole of Russian
were the cause of the conflagrations. After marching through a number
of Austerlitz, but wore a tight new uniform with Russian and foreign

of the action may be—can we ever conceive either complete freedom or
various directions on the floor and walls of the hive. Instead of a
energetic a character. He is so accustomed to unlimited power that he is
newly erected buildings were standing empty and that the serfs continued
Vasíli understood it as an expression of weariness.

“A fine mess we’ve made of it!” he remarked.
on time at an appointed place was so remote as to be tantamount to
like to pay him out, you are afraid—but here am I! And I am he...” and
announced to his household that he would remain at Bald Hills.
To such an extent had Natásha let herself go that the way she dressed
her. They sang together and everyone in the theater began clapping
cover of the small box, and assumed his usual tranquil and impenetrable
coachmen and footmen, who, with loud shouts, dragged his sleighs up to
“You, you... will see,” was all Natásha could say.
restrained animation as he stood sipping tea from a delicate Chinese

about you!”
lightness he experienced, almost comprehensible and palpable....
not leave the battery. He decided to have the guns removed from their


vague idea that he was L’russe Besuhof who had the number of the beast,
was out of the question, “I am in love with your brother once for all
intelligent, and resolute young man.
were beds in these rooms and the sick and wounded officers were lying or
thought of, all the same the young people might be brought together and
think that I cannot know it; so I do not try to know it and I talk about
and led first to one and then to another place with dozens of other men,
“Oh, leave off, you always talk nonsense and keep putting things
and one cheek was swollen to the size of a baby’s head. His nose
to look under the uniforms he would have found on every man a clean
by reason of the joy with which it can all be renounced.

“Mind, the count knows nothing. Behave as if you know nothing either,”
remained there about another half-hour.
loved no one but Prince Andrew and had never ceased to love him. She

“It’s not the soldiers only, but I’ve seen peasants today, too....
     Come to calm the torments of my gloomy retreat,

and then they put him in his sleigh and escorted him as far as the first
he has not slept,” said the orderly pleadingly in a whisper. “You should
“Couldn’t one get a book?” he asked.
Pierre’s confusion was not reflected by any confusion on Natásha’s part,
bad for another traveler, and for himself it’s unavoidable, because
staggering on his thin legs, advanced into the middle of the room.



to happen? Everyone has left Moscow and the people are rioting. How is
He supported almost singlehanded a poorhouse the order had founded in
Pávlovich joined the army. He had taken part in the beginning of the
sat on the log and was not even looking at what they were doing. When
CHAPTER II
leave him alone and for the first time in her life ventured to disobey
world began and men have killed one another no one has ever committed
For sole reply Daniel gave him a shy, childlike, meek, and amiable
he write in those idiotic broadsheets that anyone, ‘whoever it might be,
in enemy hands while the sick Russians left behind were among their
over closer to him, paused for an instant as if asking herself whether

has brought us to! Barbara Ivánovna told me the mob near killed her
In the tavern, before which stood the doctor’s covered cart, there were
As this Ápsheron battalion marched by, the red-faced Milorádovich,
Emperor’s commands on the field of Austerlitz seven years before settled



a shell burst in the midst of that dense throng, killing some and
assured him was ready to do anything for him. The captain was also in
not wishing to be the first to call.
sacrificed myself. But only the base, the vile succeed! I know who has
pity that immediately overcame him. Princess Mary, evidently engrossed
aim—to establish peace in Europe on firm foundations—has now decided
“Ah, and Ivánushka is here too!” said Prince Andrew, glancing with


The prince stopped. He saw the effect these words had produced on his
His Majesty; but we think the present delay is depriving the splendid
she had formerly been in love. In the state of intoxication she was in,

business. She felt he had a world apart, which he loved passionately and
a weak state as you know,” said the old servant.
and new furniture sat Berg and his wife. Berg, closely buttoned up in
because he lacked the power to do so but because he understood something
A very pretty curly-headed boy with a look of the Christ in the Sistine

set off in search of Prince Andrew.
bottom of his heart he had felt that relief from his despair and from
force, so variously understood by the historians themselves, is really
Bonaparte meanwhile began taking the glove off his small white hand,

“You must excuse me, dear Vicomte,” said Prince Vasíli to the
aim was to show General Weyrother—who had read his dispositions with
together. Tomorrow you’ll go with your father to see her. Be very
“What! You don’t remember Borís?” asked Sónya in surprise.
Bourienne were already awaiting him together with his architect, who by
before—a fact known only to his most intimate friends. At that time
of the streams and hollows of Sokolnitz and Schlappanitz beyond which we
publican to the smith and back again as if considering whom he ought to
be afraid.”
a very long time. “If anyone finds this silence inconvenient, let him
Again everything was shrouded in hard, dry perplexity, and again with a
Pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at Anna
pleasant smile—his eyelids drooping more than half over his old eyes,
and I am beginning to experience it. But the Guards, Rapp, the Guards
It was on the very fact of being so young that Pétya counted for success
(2) However we may prolong the period of time between the action we are
again—though she could hear Dunyásha coming—called her in the deep chest
began crossing himself. The postilion and all the other servants did the


replied to Princess Mary, so that nothing definite could be got from his
“I see I’m intruding,” Rostóv repeated.
The chief reason for devoting no time either to singing, to dress, or
“Where is the Emperor? Where is Kutúzov?” Rostóv kept asking

Denísov also came back and stayed with them. The first half of the
and strength. He was continually traveling through the three provinces

o’clock left the third column with which he had been and galloped
Murat had not lost sight of the Russians? If Napoleon had not remained




kind, that is the chief thing,” thought Princess Mary; and fear, which
of Vladímir and Anna, and he still filled the quiet and agreeable post

to destroy the French, and despite all the nonsense Rostopchín wrote in

be put to shame and perish, and may all the nations know that Thou art
starting a new theme. “They were no more than make-believes.”
It was plain that what troubled him most was that he had grieved me.
And having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave, she
But after Bennigsen’s departure, the Grand Duke Tsarévich Constantine
A truce was Kutúzov’s sole chance of gaining time, giving
cold white light of this morning which I feel is dawning for me.” The
feeling which absorbed her altogether and hindered her from following
provincial Marshal of the Nobility sent an official to Princess Mary
and making pencil notes on them, and for the first two or three minutes

liar, frightened of the name of Napoleon, and that by his blunders at
how, muddying his back, he rolled over with the hare. A ring of borzois
what was good of him.

of the dip in the ground at the rear was hurried and noisy, but the
Having ridden round the whole line from right flank to left, Prince

She drew nearer to him. Her face flushed.
“And why are children born to such men as you? If you were not a
Anna Mikháylovna shook her head.
must go and call on her. You would at least be seeing somebody, and I
He stopped in front of the Preobrazhénsk regiment, sighed deeply, and
“Oh, my dear general!” Murat again interrupted him, “with all my heart I
the movement of the locomotive by the smoke that is carried back has
a whole series corresponding to a series of events which brought the
to fight a battle ‘on his own hand’ as the Germans say. He does so.
old attendant. A doctor and two soldiers followed the carriage in a
overcoat and an immense cap evidently not his own, was crying in his
They went up to the door of the sitting room from which came the sound

“Ah!...” said Kutúzov glancing at Bolkónski as if by this
wine he had drunk and the conversation with this good-natured man had
laughing.

lips.
it,” Ilágin was saying at the same time, breathless from his gallop
always comes as a surprise, when the sun hangs low and gives more heat
crowd by the gate, gone up to a cart with a hood constructed of bast
“I have heard nothing,” Pierre replied unconcernedly. “But what have you

“How many inhabitants are there in Moscow? How many houses? Is it true

moment fearful screams reached them from the huge crowd on the Moskvá
messenger was Michaud, a Frenchman who did not know Russian, but who was
if it had been forgotten there.
smart and well kept.
Having put up at an inn they both went to sleep, and next morning his
want the money for? As if that money could add a hair’s breadth to
touching it with her lips.
the orator with animation.
ambitious activity.
put a little aside and to send something to my father,” he went on,
must act.” Pierre raised his notebook and began to read.
speak—he turned back, rapidly mounted the stairs again with the
“I am very glad I did not go to the ambassador’s,” said Prince
terrible pain of being lifted onto the stretcher, the jolting while


“Come now, deal!” exclaimed Rostóv.
he was looking at her shoulders, and she involuntarily caught his eye
In the beginning of the winter of 1805-6 Pierre received one of Anna

will slash at him!” thought Rostóv, gripping the hilt of his saber.
for itself the best position for a general engagement and found such a
daughter-in-law, “but she need not make a fool of herself, she’s

her eyes. Then he added:
daughter’s face that it was only mischief, she shook a finger at her
and Denísov’s, unable to make out what it all meant.
“I have talked and talked at the Assembly of the Nobility,” Prince
the full significance of the words he heard.
“I’ll teach you to run into the yards!”
    CHAPTER X
The valet’s sleepy, frightened exclamation, “What do you want? What’s
that Moscow is called ‘Holy Moscow’? How many churches are there in
“Spring, love, happiness!” this oak seemed to say. “Are you not
“But that’s impossible.”

game, finds that the more he considers his play the more surely he
lift his stick again but hurried into the house.
him not to forget to procure all the things he undertook to buy, and he
hinder me,” said he. “It will only make things worse....”
day,” said the visitor. “What a charming child,” she added,


stopping occasionally at a corner to make menacing gestures at the wall,
without thinking, mechanically broke the seal and read a love letter
beneath the bow over its head, with no thought of slackening pace and
recognized the shorter and younger man in the white uniform: it was
slightly trembling in the rays of the evening sun. Neither gnarled
On the twelfth of November, Kutúzov’s active army, in camp before
saying that, on the contrary, she remembered him quite well. Then

the streets.”
Another prodded his horse with the butt end of a musket, and Pierre,
presently. I am delighted to meet a compatriot. Well, and what are we
“Mamma darling!” said Natásha, kneeling by her mother and bringing her
the army drew near Moscow—despite the strength of the feeling that had
ever since, and all looked with curiosity at a fiancée who was making
whirring in rapid flight and alighting on the ground, a shell dropped
quickly changing his attitude.
and the movement of the nations.
these,” he said, handing him several papers, “make a neat memorandum
a mop, his legs far apart, sprang to the wheel; while Number Two with
The church bells everywhere were ringing for service, just as usual on
therefore when describing some single state they assume that particular




He woke up and looked round for a while with a startled expression,
on his pupil’s behalf. That’s how it’s to be understood! ‘How

intermittently but so consistently that he never once deviated from it.
changed since Prince Andrew had seen them last. The household was
half whisper, “everyone knows Count Cyril’s reputation.... He has
army entrusted to you, and acting with resolution and energy, you have

“I didn’t think they would come so soon. I stayed accidentally,” replied
Staggering amid the crush, Pierre looked about him.
strings, and then he stopped short and jerked his shoulders.
This unshakable, irrefutable consciousness of freedom, uncontrolled by

will see Moscow. You surely did not expect to see that Asiatic capital.
Five minutes later Ilyín, splashing through the mud, came running back
Sónya, Natásha, Pétya, Anna Mikháylovna, Véra, and the old count
sad, but it was a sweet, tender sadness.
line at night.... He’s a brave fellow.”
that Moscow would be abandoned, and did not prepare for it. The
Russians possessed would have been required.
reasonably, and then said he wanted a bolster placed under him as he was

saber for me? It’s got bl...” (Pétya feared to tell a lie, and the saber

    CHAPTER VIII
remarking, “Nowadays good wine rides in a carriage and pair,” passed
The valet, returning to the cottage, informed the count that Moscow was
Shinshín, lowering his voice, began to tell the count of some intrigue

pistols worn out? I brought some with me. Don’t you want any? You can
It was just when the count’s affairs had become so involved that it was
pushed the guns and wagons themselves. Whips cracked, hoofs slipped,

restraining her angry tears.
Pávlovna’s they talked with perplexity of Bonaparte’s successes just
a guard of honor of the Semënov regiment.
passionately once more to enjoy that dissipation he was so accustomed to

commander, awaiting the word of command. A second and a third cannon

the Tsar and my countwy honowably and have not stolen! And am I to be
“Only don’t blame me!” the doctor shouted up after him.
restrain the Russian army from useless engagements.

Only once, after the affair of the Berëzina, did he get angry and write
Frenchman for the money and went on admiring his own work. The Frenchman


Soon after the Emperor’s return Prince Vasíli in a conversation about
“Well, maybe!” said Prince Andrew. “Go, Másha; I’ll come
dishonesty and various irregularities. Nicholas went out into the porch
bataillons ont toujours raison. *
in each soldier.”
waiting—prepare for the war. All the efforts of those who surrounded the
in spite of this, both the face and words of his new acquaintance were

especially as the song grew brisker and the time quicker and when, here
“Ma tante, please let me stay,” said he, going up to his aunt.
the army considerably. Throughout the whole army and at headquarters
trickled down his neck, listened inattentively, with an occasional
“But do listen,” returned Prince Andrew, holding him by the
thanked him, and said he would report his gallant deed to the Emperor

chairs made a scraping noise as the gentlemen who had conferred rose
and merry faces. It was Natásha, Sónya, and Pétya, who had come to
think we thoroughly understand.


charitable to my poor aunt who adores you. Go and keep her company for
“Impudence! Impudence!” they heard behind them the voice of Mávra
and one leg bent under him. Pierre ran up to the post. No one hindered
“I’ll show them; I’ll give it to them, the brigands!” said he to
everyone else, his flight from home, the peasant coat, the pistol, and
in Vienna knew him and valued him. He was not one of those many
because the boy standing below wants to eat it?
conception of the movement of the heavenly bodies any longer exists. If
French had given battle at Borodinó, did not achieve its purpose when it
secured his second boot and was slapping one boot against the other.

“I was going to ask you. I know nothing except that it was all I could
dug out for them by the soldiers and roofed with branches and turf. The
And the farther we go back in examining events the less arbitrary do
“We don’t interfere with you and Berg.”
the cot. He did not look round, but still gazing at the infant’s face
“we will talk of it later” (and he looked round at Rostóv). “Come
“Yes, I have just seen him.”


citizens are returning every day to their homes and orders have been

whole dining hall, and last of all the children, tutors, and governesses

forming up. “One word from me, one movement of my hand, and that ancient
suggested that she had resolved to endure her troubles uncomplainingly
The nobility don’t gwudge theah lives—evewy one of us will go and bwing
or even in the rear.)
Soldiers and militiamen ran bareheaded past Pierre toward the
negative concept of not doing what is blameworthy or it is a source of
“He knows of course what this loss means to me. He can’t want my

Two of the enemy’s shots had already flown across the bridge, where
lucrative posts in Petersburg.
Nicholas’ letter in which he mentioned Princess Mary had elicited, in
Pierre rose and took his leave.
seemed to her the acme of musical delight.

for his part tried to pretend to the count that he considered these
Meanwhile downstairs in young Nicholas Bolkónski’s bedroom a little lamp
The old prince knew that if he told his daughter she was making a
As soon as the aide-de-camp had said this, the old mustached officer,
of amusement which someone for some reason had to provide for him.

had heard of him inspired him with but little respect for the man.
Chasseurs. Though he did not want to remind the Rostóvs of Bolkónski,
showing the necessity of first paying off the loans from the Land Bank,
and accouterments put in order.
Natásha and tell her that the old times must be forgotten, that in

“No, that can’t be!”



finished dressing and with her old nurse’s big shawl wrapped round
news—if it’s not false. Bennigsen seems to have obtained a complete
her future directeur de conscience, but the next evening Monsieur de
been on his way back to Russia long ago had not his wound unexpectedly
An Austrian officer in a white uniform with green plumes in his hat
speaking of it to her now.
Zúbovski rampart, but rose through the pure air in columns. No flames
and drew it downwards as if wishing to ascertain whether it was firmly
enfeebled. Bennigsen, the Tsarévich, and a swarm of adjutants general


chasseur regiment and in the lines of the Kiev grenadiers—fine fellows

from both sides and was fought in the simplest and most artless way.
strained to such a degree that it will certainly break,” said Pierre (as
One afternoon noticing Natásha shivering with fever, Princess Mary took
Kuzmínichna, and Vasílich came into the drawing room and, having closed
say, that Mary is not to blame, but those to blame—the one to blame—is
(1) The relation to the external world of the man who commits the deeds.
extraordinary, superhuman capacities, or simply men of very various
Moscow’s last day had come. It was a clear bright autumn day, a Sunday.

“I only said that it would be more to the purpose to make sacrifices
the house among the rosebushes. The shutters were all closed, except at

people, and flurrying them still more. Pétya directed things in the
itself?”
her grief, or perhaps just because of it, she took on herself all the
distinct from the main course of the battle.) So the battle of Borodinó
troops in turn should enter Moscow à la maraude * to obtain provisions

make your acquaintance, General!” he added, with a gesture of kingly
field of Austerlitz, enduring the heedless blows of his left foot and



principal guests. He was just going to take it when Dólokhov, leaning
not consecutive and clear but only the feeling that prompted them.

chanter—was holding him under the arm with one hand while warding off
conception of some one man who saved Russia and destroyed Napoleon. In
he had finished. She jumped up and hugged and kissed him. “Nicholas,
placed a chair for her.
“My father!” he thought. (Though there were two good portraits of Prince
She began to cry and a still greater sense of pity, tenderness, and love
they don’t see it!” came identical shouts from the ranks all along the
Rostóvs’ yard. Many of the wounded asked them not to unload the carts
to continue his military service, and when the war recommenced

In the ballroom guests stood crowding at the entrance doors awaiting
who at the Rostóvs’ had jocularly assumed the role of Natásha’s
words), others were eating bread; the more severely wounded looked

“How is it pointing?” asked Nicholas, riding a hundred paces toward

herself,” said Nicholas, also not listening to anyone and regardless
under him; “turn this way!” he shouted to those with the gun. “It
and hearing something quite different. Formerly he had appeared to be
looking at something concealed under a cloth.


emotions, that for a long time past those memories had not entered his
Still alive... tenacious... serves him right! Torture serves a thief
“Ah, Count Rostóv!” exclaimed Pierre joyfully. “Then you are his
high, high overhead, and then it seemed to sink so low that one could
When he reached home it was already getting dark. Some eight people had
The officer pointed with his hand to the smoke visible on the left
friend’s look was now still more clearly expressed in the smile
column advanced into action.
terror.
“I know who has taken it,” repeated Rostóv in an unsteady voice,
this side or in that way, but because it was laid on from all sides over
Rapp made no reply.
with hurried steps and bent head, not knowing where and why, along the
a restrained swagger which would have been ridiculous had he not been


aside.

only after some seconds that the impression produced by Prince Andrew’s
have been “stupid fellow”... or “the whole affair will be ruined,” or
Having lifted her head and let her arms droop lifelessly, as ballet
a whole month. Napoleon’s position is most brilliant. He can either fall
had to be punished, he always felt undecided and consulted everybody in

understand. “So others are even more afraid than I am!” he thought. “So
Andrew, with the purest regrets and memories, but probably she will
“I am straight from the palace. Seeing the position we are in, I think
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

And probably still more perturbed by the fact that he had uttered this

“A horrid business dragging these corpses about with one! It would be
scanned his unfamiliar face, “as to that person, sire...” continued
evidently understood Balashëv’s importance. He led him past his soldiers
bursts of anger in the presence of Kurákin and then of Balashëv.

Nearer at hand glittered golden cornfields interspersed with copses.
The Russians, half of whom died, did all that could and should have been
Mílka would immediately pounce on the hare, but she overtook him and

“To the fifth gun, wheel it up!” came shouts from one side.

Pierre hurriedly turned away from her and again addressed Princess Mary,

      *Poisonous nourishment of a too sensitive soul,
complex feeling restrained him. He could not utter them, though he

defective commissariat, the treachery of the Pole Przebyszéwski and of


another time.”
They entered the elegant, newly decorated, and luxurious dining room.
weakness—the one to which he had confessed when admitted to the

whites glittering and rolling as he waved his sheathed saber in a small
man who has been suffering innocently and in vain? A paper has come from

the flesh of different animals—from men to horses—in various stages of
thinking—especially at that moment. It suffused him, seized him, and
“I know she will. She saw something last year.”
and connections he belonged to the groups of old and honored guests, and
house. Though he expected that the story of his escapade would be
While this was taking place in Petersburg the French had already passed
excitement, around chin and mouth. The quartermaster frowned, looking
In another form but along the same path of reflection the other sciences
The squadron overtook and passed the infantry and the battery—which had


“You see, my fwiend,” he said, “we sleep when we don’t love. We
carrying her burden so lightly. Old men and dull dispirited young ones
glow were in Moscow?” remarked one of the footmen.
not realize that he had come. His coming had nothing to do with
but was told (it was chiefly Karp who did the talking, Dron not showing
joyfully that the men themselves were awed by their multitude and the
fate of men of action, and the higher they stand in the social hierarchy
“What sort of another blackguard are you? I’ll have you shot!
him that some necessary documents had not yet arrived from town, and he


“How many miles?”
a valse and as they danced he pressed her waist and hand and told her
with life, but the malady that had formerly found expression in such
laid it on his shoulder without looking at him. The aide-de-camp, an
which her dancing shoes showed, and in her mother’s dressing jacket,
“The will will show that, my dear; our fate also depends on it.”
motive of his visit, “is it true that the Dowager Empress wants
something, but Napoleon always interrupted him. To the alleged insanity
Toward three o’clock the French attacks ceased. On the faces of all
him for his quickness of temper, and Rostóv replied:
what he was to do. The coming of these visitors annoyed him. “What are
and young people are rarely capable of it. His hearers expected a story

a party last night, and there out of five ladies three were Roman

and when he came to himself a third time it was in the complete
and his action more due to the law of inevitability, to someone who
ready for the general?” he added, with a slight inclination of his head
gingerbread, and poppyseed sweets (of which Pétya was particularly

sounded and you’ll be in a pretty position without your boots!” (The
was admitted at that terrible door. This officer’s audience lasted a
family, Belóva, an old maiden lady, an inmate of the house, and many

the crowd collected round him he seemed confused, but at the demand
stretching out his hands, with his mouth wide open and his eyes fixed.

“From Héloïse?” asked the prince with a cold smile that showed his

On seeing his face and meeting his eyes Princess Mary’s pace suddenly

hussars, but still with that naïve air that made it impossible to know
sickness, toil and rest, and its intellectual interests in thought,




but a few days later the countess sent for Sónya and, with a cruelty
expressing... as in its last note... you understand... Besides, unless

“To the Head of the French Government... Au chef du gouvernement
fluttering in that light. Túshin had not returned, the doctor had not
said all he longed to say, and not Tíkhon but I might have heard and
The princess looked at him, not grasping what he was saying, but cheered
plaiting slippers out of cloth selvedges. He looked up at the opening
absent-mindedly as if forgetting all he wanted to say or do.
obliged to admit that some of these transfers are not normal delegations
to what he dreaded more than anything in the world—to ridicule; but
this movement means, what caused it, and what force produced these

superiors, located in the background, re-formed them and brought them
“Though it was tête-à-tête,” Anatole continued, “still I can’t...”
“Your excellency! Eh, Prince!” said the trembling voice of Timókhin, who
arrived and there’s a letter for you.”
is grand. But Kutúzov—the man who from the beginning to the end of his
spite of my request that they should let no one in,” he went on,
the one nor in the other but in the union of the two.
expected—neither Napoleon, nor Alexander, nor still less any of those
CHAPTER V

brotherhood of man,” he kept saying to himself, associating these
judge not by their conversation or expressions of feeling but by their
“Come and eat something. Have a drink!” Dólokhov shouted to him
outside his uniform.
father’s. I had to talk over a very important matter with him. I only
pretense of helping, was in everyone’s way.

“You are very kind,” she said to him.


The sun had by now risen and shone gaily on the bright verdure.
man he met.
illegitimate.”
limping, to the door at which Pierre was standing. Pierre wished to go
couch was high, with a feather bed and five pillows each smaller than
Sónya. She valued the company of those to whom she could come striding



men uselessly, and so had hastened to throw some sharpshooters into the
except the cavalry, the artillery, and the transport—there was no forage
theory can always say that such and such a person took the lead because
in the direction of the Lubyánka Street.
the elder, as though shielding himself, had replied, as all village
prince in Persia, where he killed the Shah’s brother. Now all the
serious tone, “but the prince told me to ‘go and tell the colonel

the officer she unfolded the kerchief and took out of it a white

his presence invited Rostopchín to dinner on St. Nicholas’ Day, and
Denísov began to laugh.


you yourself say your Papa’s affairs are in a very bad way. And what
spiritual gaze was fixed.


decrease in the strength of the nation—even though it is unintelligible
a dark passage.
to the second of September, that is from the battle of Borodinó to the
    CHAPTER XI
never takes direct part in the action itself, but only gives general

weak that it was out of the question to move her to the country, and
Natásha and Sónya his fiancée’s invitation to her wedding, and
the hill, they threw up their caps and shouted: “Vive l’Empereur!” and
“I’ll call him,” said Pétya.
if she were blossoming under the praise of this dear Countess Bezúkhova
“But I don’t in the least want to, Mamma.”
and smiled at him over her bare shoulder. Anatole, who was as handsome
scenes they had witnessed during the campaign, and avoided all talk of
him, as it seemed, not indifferent to her.
to join some Swedish forces at Stralsund; how two hundred and twenty
gowns. The first person Rostóv met in the officers’ ward was a thin
became, the more serious and stern grew Sónya’s.
Pierre that she understood just what he wished to convey. It was clear
CHAPTER V
fixedly at whatever her eyes chanced to fall on. This solitude exhausted

himself. What angered him was that the coming of these visitors revived

sorrow, sadness, or self-reproach, that she purposely deceived herself
but not deciding to do so. Though he did not speak, Princess Mary saw
Of all these men Prince Andrew sympathized most with Pfuel, angry,
God, the three primordial elements—sulphur, mercury, and salt—or
Just as he was going to open it the sounds ceased, the door opened, and
away with them. Sventsyáni was remembered by the hussars only as the
De Beausset’s hands meanwhile were busily engaged arranging the present
more warmly than anyone else, and in the course of the dispute drew from
her that if he lived he would always thank God for his wound which had
“Good-by, Peter Kirílych!” Pierre heard the other voices repeat.
unfolded itself in his soul as if freed from the bondage of life that
“Do promise, do promise, Vasíli!” cried Anna Mikháylovna as he
anything and only saying now and then, “Oh, why did he go away?”
“But he’s sucked our blood and now he thinks he’s quit of us. He’s been
“There are a thousand reasons why,” laying special emphasis on the why.
He could not look calmly at the standards of the passing battalions.
“I shall not be at peace till you promise me this.”
of the mighty arm being stricken powerless, but all the generals and

was so pressed to the wall by people who probably were unaware of the
where the ground was soft. The two borzois of the huntsman who had
asking to be discharged. She replied that she had never doubted his
to tactics to have attacked in mass, but in fact they split up
trouvez là le mot pour rire,” * he said, as if strengthening his
That night another wounded man was driven down the Povarskáya, and Mávra
and he was quietly telling me something about the teaching of our order,

behaving with Borís.”
“Oh, that would be so dread...” she began and, prevented by agitation
assemble for the usual silent prayer with closed doors before starting.
purport or significance. Such were Willarski and even the Grand Master

Rostóv and Ilyín were in the merriest of moods. On the way to
Andrew? Don’t forget that she has grown up and been educated in
Dmítrievna’s deep voice suddenly inquired from the other end of the
just going to the left flank. Then when we get back, do spend the night
flourished his castanets as if threatening someone. The soldiers,
“Have you brought me sad news, Colonel?”

These were two Frenchmen who had been hiding in the forest. They came up
and the victory of them that put their trust in Thee, and to Thee be all

he fingered the money in his pocket and wondered whether it would seem
A spiritual wound produced by a rending of the spiritual body is like
Our infantry were stationed there, and at the farthest point the
taken away.’ You remember? She is one that hath not; why, I don’t know.
no longer in the unpleasantly hostile tone of Nicholas’ last remark.
and red-faced man, screwing up his eyes and blinking because of the

toward the fire.
commander in chief would otherwise be dissatisfied. On hearing this the
Icon of St. Nicholas, Murat halted to await news from the advanced


heard, and much farther to the right beyond the dragoons, the officer of
Pierre. He went up to him, took his hand (a thing he never used to do),

“Not lower, who said we were lower?... How do I know what I

members of the committee were aware of the Emperor’s dislike of Kutúzov,
“What is it, dear?”

the mist, and his cold face wore that special look of confident,
He took a potato, drew out his clasp knife, cut the potato into two

said, “how am I to stifle in my heart these temptations of the devil?
Petersburg. Whatever I may be, I can’t live under Bonaparte’s rule.”
had been dug and from which a few guns were firing, was the most

concern myself about his personal qualities: he has been commissioned to
“Christ be with you!” Kutúzov repeated and went toward his
troops arriving from Russia, he risked being forestalled on that road

French, turning to a general, “my husband is deserting me? He is going
and leaned against the wall to keep from falling. To see him, talk to
than you or me,” as they said, and to doubt the correctness of that
miserable man who stood before him, but the task he had begun had to be
on earth is worrying me?” he asked himself as he rode back from the
was jealous of Prince Andrew’s memory), or on the rare occasions when
“This is what I think. Austria has been made a fool of, and she is
face reappeared in the doorway and behind hers other faces...

Though shells and bullets did not whistle over the road along which he


the first time picturing to himself her soul. And he understood her
Anna Pávlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she nor
restless and hastened to rejoin her. Together they felt more in harmony
“Hm... Hm...!” growled Pierre, frowning without looking at her, and
by the poetic feelings that had attracted him to her, but by something
Nicholas turned away from her. Natásha too, with her quick instinct,
at all as it really was. Rostóv was a truthful young man and would on
Pierre, from joy, agitation, and embarrassment, was not in a state to
scattered his forces in large detachments, and with Napoleon and his
Mávra Kuzmínichna did not let him finish.
in strengthening their friendship. Denísov evidently tried to expose
to which Pierre did not agree. On the other hand, Pierre demanded that
by not being a husband to his wife, and secondly by not allowing himself
After listening a few moments in silence, the count and his attendant
talking about.
day!”
as was his custom when at home—taking leave of a good-looking,
out into the town. When lunatics command our armies God evidently means
And the prince began explaining all the blunders which, according to
crowded closer and closer together. They advanced the few hundred paces
splinters!”
about three hundred men.

Petersburg society was assembled there: people differing widely in age
interested traveler asks about a new city he intends to visit, but as

face of the man addressing him. Rostopchín grew confused and became
attained by the guerrilla warfare which was destroying the French, and
“I’m not a goose, but they are who cry about trifles,” said
keeper, fell face downward on the pavement.
derive from a course of treatment he would lose as a result of the
hands.
the huntsmen were already nearing it. Rostóv, having finally settled

rough draft of his answer to it. He became animated when he began
quarters, turned round to the soldiers standing at the entrance, and in
After the definite refusal he had received, Pétya went to his room
Rostóv recalled at that moment a strange conversation he had once had
“Ah, how do you do, great warrior?” said Rostopchín as soon as the short

mentioned by name the greatest dignitaries of the day.


peak, nodding his head continually. When he came up to the guard of
four dead. Two men in peasant coats ran away at the foot of the wall,
comrades fully understood.

he was admitted to the Emperor, and an hour later he rode off with
and Count Ilyá Rostóv became more and more moved, more glass was
While Rostóv was thus arguing with himself and riding sadly away,
How, or by what means, he was connected with the great event foretold in
outing.

Frenchmen. Their laughter and their mutually incomprehensible remarks in
Borodinó. They were accompanied by a doctor, Prince Andrew’s valet, his
“Your excellency, here are two trophies,” said Dólokhov, pointing
“Well, that’s all right,” continued the regimental commander. “A
appear to know it.
Evidently it has to be so,” said he to himself, and hastily undressing
“There now, we’re sad,” said he, touching Pierre’s hand. “Have I
the imaginations of a dozen people. It could not exist because it was
their favorite corner where their most intimate talks always began.
On the seventeenth of August Rostóv and Ilyín, accompanied by Lavrúshka

He bent his head and was silent for some time.
work it would turn to some unexpected idea and he had not the strength
been cleared of the enemy were most diverse and personal, and at first

life. “What is she so glad about? What is she thinking of? Not of

studying historic events as the results of man’s free will. For if a





old father, and entering the military service, my dear. And there was a
that he had no opinion at all on the matter. Another who wished to

ambassador was there, and a foreign prince of the blood who had of
despite the fact that the doctors treated him, bled him, and gave him
seem very bad, and every learned militarist criticizes them with looks
it,’” Prince Andrew continued after a short silence, again quoting
Pierre rode up to them. Without being aware of it he had come to the
still didn’t finish carting the dead away. And as for the wolves, he
excursions, he spent most of his time at home making himself one with
“Nicholas, I saw it... he was to blame, but why do you... Nicholas!” and
out in front of the outposts, parading his courage. A bullet fired by
“Ah, that’s always the way!” said Nesvítski with a wave of the
while others sought some extraordinary explanation of so strange an
audience over his spectacles and continued.
Rostóv took the purse in his hand, examined it and the money in it, and
Rostopchín, shouting something in a hoarse voice and making signs to him
Málo-Yaroslávets, the place where the last battle with the French was
setting it on fire and the French batteries were now firing at them, no
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm

her spontaneous, happy, ringing laughter. “And do you know,” she
one to two: previously we had a hundred thousand against a hundred and
inevitable conditions of a commander in chief’s actions describe to
Man’s free will differs from every other force in that man is directly
“Forgive me!” she whispered, raising her head and glancing at him.

and annoyance of the countess, had for some unaccountable reason found
he, and even she, was. This contrast weighed on and yet cheered him

their present situation.
Continued abstention from speech, and constant avoidance of everything
the company commander might get killed and he, as senior in the company,
“Vasíli Denísov, your son’s friend,” he said, introducing
“Why did you push yourself in there by daylight? You ass! Well, why
of it.
this matter is merely to serve as an instrument for the illumination

or Kutúzov was. Some said the report that the Emperor was wounded was
believed it without any mental reservation. The absence of suffering,
questioned Balashëv about the Russian capital, not merely as an

chattering voices had reached her from the corridor, went into Princess
“More, please, more!” cried Natásha at the door as soon as the
Some of the nearest relatives had not yet left. They were sitting in
taken from the kitchen for them to try. That beverage was already known
“We don’t riot, we’re following the orders,” declared Karp, and at that
men. Bagratión was the best, Napoleon himself admitted that. And of
Napoleon came out of the tent the shouting of the Guards before his
have been summoned here not to discuss whether it’s best for the empire
sinking heart, wretched as she always was now when she found herself
He is an aide-de-camp of Kutúzov’s and will be here tonight.”
white horse, was Prince Bagratión. Prince Andrew stopped, waiting for
poorer than the poorest beggar. A thousand thanks, dear friend, for the
will to tell only what happened. It is very difficult to tell the truth,
“That abbé is very interesting but he does not see the thing in the
air of a happy conqueror who has attained the object of his desires.
everything was all right and everyone was cheerful. The thought has come
considered him conceited, cold, and disagreeable. But among these people
Thanks to Denísov the conversation at table soon became general and
the case, hesitated about lifting the injured or dead. The soldiers,
“Natásha! Natásha!...” cried the countess. “It’s not true... it’s not
help being afraid,” he said laughing.
not restrain himself. He touched his horse, gave the word of command,
his lips, and repeating—“Excellent! Delicious!” His face grew red and
who gives himself the airs of a monarch.”

novel one, that every moment of his life belonged to her and to the
“Marry, marry, my boy!... A good family!... Clever people, eh? Rich,
“After that, I could not make out what there was; something blue and

“Cousinage—dangereux voisinage,” * she added.
we call that freedom.
administrative, and financial, from the Council of State down to the

them. There were wounded in the yards, at the windows of the houses, and
“As I was saying to you, Andrew, be kind and generous as you always
absorbed him and to that question he heard no reply from anyone. The
two battalions of the Sixth Chasseurs in fine order. Before they had
“What decision have you been pleased to come to?” said he.
Night had come. There were stars in the sky and the new moon shone out
enemy’s advance, and by this effort to unite them while avoiding battle
had not only held the field but had repulsed the French. Though the
was to explain the whole affair by word of mouth, besides delivering
Mademoiselle Bourienne took from her reticule a proclamation (not
everything, annihilating him.
“How about my son Borís, Prince?” said she, hurrying after him into
identical.

occurred these hints would have been forgotten, as we have forgotten the
that the relations between him and herself could lead to love on her
sincerely believed it to be, and that everyone else was to blame.
gentle, and more affectionate than Princess Mary had known him for a
The movements of the Russian and French armies during the campaign
of life reasonably, considered important only what was rational, and


dinner parties,” warmly replied Chichagóv, who tried by every word he
began, with a blush that looked very strange on her thin, dignified,


Is it possible that the meaning of life was not disclosed to him
embarrassment, her own face expressed confusion and suspicion.
Pierre, having made up his mind to obey his monitress implicitly, moved
all Moscow, that everyone will say that you, drunk and not knowing what
all this shame and sorrow, but wanted now to play with him as a cat does
Andrew slowly, not taking his eyes off his wife.
thoughts (which he would not have told to his mother, his sister, or
CHAPTER XI
“That’s Ilágin’s huntsman having a row with our Iván,” said
is 64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at

still, with his father’s disapproval they wouldn’t have been happy, and

occupations, the children’s upbringing, were all selected not merely

Górki!” said Prince Andrew suddenly.
that year, as all his estates had been remortgaged, and so Nicholas,
give us the value of the unknown factor but gives us a ratio between two

“Monseigneur!” exclaimed Pierre, not in an offended but in a pleading
“They’re frightened,” he said confidentially in a hoarse voice. “I say I
To them the words of Milorádovich seem very interesting, and so do their
answer the old prince without expressing views of his own, he now


trap, and a baggage cart. With her traveled Mademoiselle Bourienne,
Prince Andrew followed Speránski’s every word and movement with
soldiers, and carried him to the hut. Ramballe put his arms around their

the external world, on time, and on cause, we arrive at laws.”
princess told the count that she would be delighted, and only begged him
“If we live we shall see,” replied Bilíbin, his face again becoming
“Ah, madam!” he began. “Madam, Countess... Countess Rostóva, if
Austrian and Russian troops, both those freshly arrived from Russia and
“If the animals leading the herd change, this happens because the
firm and resolute—they were those of Napoleon. He had just finished
“Troubles, troubles, my dear fellow!” he said to Pierre. “What troubles
to sympathize in any way.
mother, drawing her hand from beneath her old mantle and laying


girl, with the same artificial smile, and the princess found herself in
“There we are!” Rostopchín shouted at Pierre louder than before,
For a long time that night Princess Mary sat by the open window of her
and a flask, and Nesvítski was treating some officers to pies and real
CHAPTER II
was so constructed that one could stand up in the middle of the trench
“If you ask me,” said Prince Andrew, without looking up (he was
apart from the laws of reason that define it, differs in no way from
pointing out the French to the cavalry.
It was by now late in the afternoon. Half the street was in shadow, the

It needs no critical exertion to reduce utterly to dust any deductions
Because it happened so! “Chance created the situation; genius utilized
dying man wished to see, her own admission was assured. Casting a rapid
times which could never return, tears of vexation that she should so
    * “Tell me, is Colonel Gérard here?”
The news of the day in Petersburg was the illness of Countess Bezúkhova.

if not understanding what was said to him. Wolzogen, noticing “the old
   And dare not Herculean Russians trouble...

capital of the Tsars would perish. But my clemency is always ready to
All Pierre’s daydreams now turned on the time when he would be free. Yet

kind, because he has been a benefactor to them both. As Sterne says:
“Countess Apráksina, poor thing, has lost her husband and she has
of face, evidently worn out with childbearing—she had had twelve.
same,” thought Natásha.
“Is that their Tsar himself? He’s not bad!” low voices could be heard


her sleeves and puffing heavily.
envious and Natásha could not help joining in.

Mary! Say...” And the little princess began to cry capriciously like
would at last try to make a good match there. He indicated to him
Suddenly the sound of a firing of cannon was heard from the embankment,
“O Lord! The people are like wild beasts! How could he be alive?” voices
incoherently and blushing.
as he liked, now in Petersburg I hear he has been doing such terrible
that was usually in a bad temper) lost control of himself. Another
But despite this, thanks to his regiment, Prince Andrew had something to
“What manners! I thought they would never go,” said the countess,
horses.
do next. Anna Mikháylovna with her eyes indicated a chair that stood
The smell of the food the Preobrazhénskis were eating and a sense of
the flames talking and shouting could be heard. Seeing that his trap

without having definite means to maintain my wife, I should be acting
Denísov. “They keep dwagging the wegiment to and fwo all day. If they
himself on the breast as a general he had heard speaking had done, but

things,” and the skin over his left temple puckered, “either you
Petersburg, and had been expelled from there for riotous conduct and
happen to them when they were free, but he insisted, though reluctantly,

be defined, especially when the strength of the acting forces cannot be
paralyzed the action of fifty thousand men required to secure his
out everyone has been enraptured by her? They say she is amazingly
knew what she ought to have said to Natásha, but she had been unable
new officers arrived, new men and horses, and above all everybody was
    * To Rostopchín’s ferocious patriotism.
that rarely had so many beautiful women been assembled in one place.
Pierre, Natásha met her on the threshold.

taking no notice of his arrival. A wax candle stood at each side of the
after that he did not meddle in business affairs. But once the countess
up again.
immensity of the power they constituted.
seized her prey, the hare moved and darted along the balk between the
red.... How can I explain it to you?”
during the night and attack the French right flank the following day.
at Mytíshchi, at Tróitsa, and at Yaroslávl.
When he noticed in Balashëv’s face the disagreeable impression this
flayed, some not, and broken-down carts beside which solitary soldiers
her old self again, but with a change in her moral physiognomy, as a
fast as her nimble little feet would carry her. Borís did not laugh.

of late amounted to cruelty. Had he forced her to prostrate herself to


nor even listen to the music; she saw only the painted cardboard and the
still sound, yellowish teeth.
decree concerning the ranks allotted to courtiers, which is causing so



man whose authority would be willingly recognized, and Bennigsen is the
Natásha. Nicholas understood that something must have happened between
that Nicholas received a promise from his mother that Sónya should not
“Who do you belong to?” he asked.

mind was so full of the question why she alone was granted so little

of the other hospital patients, but it was not this that struck Rostóv.
wished to return to that former world of pure thought, but he could not,

“Remember that you will answer for the consequences,” said Prince
Reading these letters, Nicholas felt a dread of their wanting to
in life, one she had not yet experienced, irreparable and
gatherings, everyone said that Countess Bezúkhova had died of a
your hopes and your lies.”
real or not? Do you remember what fun it was?”
“Why did Sónya run away?” asked Rostóv.
rest of the mummers seated themselves in the other two sleighs.
his father with frightened eyes, but did not cry, because no one else
her head a lady standing on the opposite side, beyond the choir.
those forests and fields, the bright, oscillating, limitless distance
him to see her, telling him how grieved she was about him and how she
Prince Vasíli gave Pierre a significant look.
with a serious face asked Sónya, who was considered an excellent reader,
keeping Pierre close beside her, entered the room even more boldly than
made him still angrier, for he was fully convinced, not by reasoning
“You see yours is already an officer in the Guards, while my Nicholas
screams, squeals, and waving of whips that caused even the shaft horses
this expectation did not upset the regular routine of life in the old
chief thing in his eyes was not the nitrogen in the soil, nor the oxygen

But Natásha would not give in. She turned everything out and began
had great success and was honored by the special attention of So-and-so,
“You know they’ve come, Marie?” said the little princess, waddling
light.”
moment, laid in it an Order on a red ribbon. Napoleon, without looking,
nobles. Every face expressed respectful, awe-struck curiosity. Pierre
Natásha, animated and excited, looked about her with wide-open

about in it. All this naked white human flesh, laughing and shrieking,
“Anyhow, I’m in your way,” he said in a low tone. “Come and talk

CHAPTER XI
comparing it with the movement of the ship do we convince ourselves that

Ilyúshka, the one who danced at Count Orlóv’s, you remember, in a
the west at the end of the eighteenth century and their drive eastward
have been proud to let him see us. There now—you talk of my absence,
Langeron’s objections were valid but it was obvious that their chief
looked inquiringly at Pierre and, as if Pierre’s look had told him
for the strengthening of the heart by faith and hope, and its animation
about the room.
    CHAPTER XX
on the fire.

face as if driving off a troublesome fly. “And why are you stopping
movements deduced by him from the history of Frederick the Great’s wars,
division had been seen at Formínsk and that being separated from the

the ecclesiastical point of view, and that her directors were making
angrily at him. Bondarchúk’s horse swerved and galloped past.
After a short silence he rose.
“As there’s no one to fall in love with on campaign, he’s fallen

Russia, but as it is I have to postpone my return for three months. You
He drove to their house in some agitation. The memory of Natásha was
old lady, who was always kind to me and to whom I am under many
“Beautiful,” said the doctor in answer to a remark about the
cavalry baggage and Russian prisoners separated from the rest of the
to us equally valid in itself and equally false by its insignificance

bandy-legged domestic serf in a peaked cap and sheepskin coat.
she had worn at her first Petersburg ball.
The old prince had gone to the town and was expected back any minute.
unable to understand all the complex significance his words had for
“Retire! All to retire!” he shouted from a distance.

“I am afraid for the baby,” she said to Mademoiselle Bourienne:

hopes to bring upon us recoil on his own head, and may Europe delivered
steps. When at last, smartly whirling his partner round in front of her
Anatole is no genius, but he is an honest, goodhearted lad; an excellent
out a traitor! They slander him as a traitor, and the only result will
in one who is alive. Evidently only with an effort did he understand
disagreeable tone to Prince Hippolyte who was blocking his path.

her way in the big forest. She incoherently described the depths of
the room, when Natásha, her face distorted by anger, burst in like a
Factories because he was comfortable there, that at Krásnoe he checked
“Into the stove... into the fire with it! I tell you once for all, my
(Strictly speaking, Daniel Cooper was one figure of the anglaise.)
When Princess Mary heard from Nicholas that her brother was with the
by the will of a man but at the will of Him who governs men and worlds
An interpreter rode up to the group.
no account have told a deliberate lie. He began his story meaning to

provisions and guns—should consent to carry out the will of these weak
hoped to lead he still lived the old life, only in new surroundings.
writes that the French were beaten at... at... what river is it?”

wished to devote her whole life to him.
added. Countess Hélène Bezúkhova had suddenly died of that terrible
always the first thing that tells me all is well. When I was driving
attention to such trifles!’ The Emperor did not condescend to reply.

Monsieur Magnítski,” he said, fully articulating every word and
guard remained in the Dorogomílov suburb, where they had ample room. The
said the princess in a tone of entreaty.



run back to her.”

“There’s the corner at the crossroads, where the cabman, Zakhár,
camp to you. You will see everything best from where Count Bennigsen
“The exchange horses have just come,” answered the servant. “Will
nothing; teach me what to do and how to use my will! Take me, take
“No, it will not do,” she said decidedly, clasping her hands. “No,
could hear all that passed in the study.
for partisan warfare. At night he would go out for booty and always
In the middle of his story, just as he was saying: “You cannot imagine
that the Council and Senate are estates of the realm, he said that the
At that moment the pitiful wailing of women was heard from different
slightly bowed his head. The Emperor re-entered the ballroom and
leave his face.
of him and loved him. But he was kind and gentle only to those of his
compared her feeling for them with her feeling for him, and felt
stand, a young lad with a long nose and long hair, wearing a monk’s

audible the whole length of the table.
with her knitting. Princess Mary took a book and began reading. Only
doubt filled her soul. Could the joy of love, of earthly love for a
    CHAPTER I

charging twenty-five rubles for a two hours’ drive, and rarely
the others. Again someone shouted, “Stretchers!” Four men seized the
at the faces of his suite, young and animated as his own. Czartorýski,
news we had received for a long time.”
French, so from the moment he entered the hut Pétya did not take his
He mentioned what he had written to an old field marshal, a friend
Napoleon noticed Balashëv’s embarrassment when uttering these last
from Anatole, of which, without taking in a word, she understood only
“Dear, dear! But still tell him to come to the club—it will all blow

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the
“Oh, yes, yes, yes!” said the count hastily. “I shall be very pleased,

mustache I don’t know, but I love her.”
“The chessmen are set up, the game will begin tomorrow!”

“I am living at Countess Rostóva’s,” replied Borís, again
bastards!” he cried, suddenly lifting his head.
For the solution of the question of free will or inevitability, history
years there had been so many changes in his life, he had thought, felt,
“And I have a great favor to ask of you, Papa,” said he.
father, muttered in a whisper:
On the evening of the first of September, after his interview with
a war had there been no English intrigues and no Duke of Oldenburg, and
believing in the possibility of goodness and truth, but of seeing the
intimacy with Mademoiselle Bourienne. The idea that at the first moment
At last the Emperor left the army, and as the most convenient and indeed
to foot he went out.
placed sideways, screening the light of the candle from him, and was
“To Petersburg!” she repeated as if unable to understand.
and quill pens his hands came upon on his uncle’s table.

the French and lay down their arms at the first demand.


“Ah, my friend!” she said, touching his arm as she had done her

Another time he interrupted, saying:
abundance, then? And a housewife? And your old parents, are they still
what the government is for. You’d better listen to what people are
The Emperor’s manifesto was read, evoking enthusiasm, and then all moved
Having found what she was looking for in the reticule she handed it to
Pierre. The estates he had not before visited were each more picturesque
on the snow.
the day’s success—a success exceeding his expectations, but the old

pursuits, hasten from one side of Europe to the other, plunder and
Carelessly holding in his stallion that was neighing and pawing the
influence of the external world, we never get a conception of freedom
her face. Her face said: “Why ask? Why doubt what you cannot but know?
Emperor’s letter indicated to him the very position he had already
matters without looking at the Russian general.
“Oh yes, one sees that plainly. Paris!... A man who doesn’t know Paris
sacrificing everything. He was not occupied with the question of what to

Unconsciously imitating her father, she now tried to express herself as
passing. Natásha apparently tried not to be a burden or a hindrance to
which penetrated into the very depths of her heart, it was impossible


In June the battle of Friedland was fought, in which the Pávlograds did
into several groups who all discussed the advantages and disadvantages
those who were holding him under the armpits, and of his gray, curly,
them!” he reflected.
On the contrary it tormented her more than anything else of late, and


1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used

getting out caldrons and rye biscuit, and feeding the horses. A third
looked round at his fellow prisoners and scrutinized them.
Kutúzov to anyone; in his opinion Kutúzov was not only admirable
Napoleon happened to fall into one of the fainting fits to which he was

befitted a grown-up man and an officer—without hinting at their previous
    CHAPTER XII

to Prince Andrew, and knew that the Rostóvs had lived in the country
it.

Her brother shook his head incredulously.
The little kitten, feasting her eyes on him, seemed ready at any moment
They say and write and print that the soul and freedom do not exist,
“Wetched business,” he muttered to himself. “How much is left in
his voice. “She is living in Moscow and you are here. Remember,
this moved, or seemed to move, as the smoke and mist spread out over
hinges, a smile appeared on the face with the attentive eyes, and from
“What are you saying about the militia?” he asked Borís.
“Come here, Wostóv. Let’s dwink to dwown our gwief!” shouted
every letter.
pleasantly considering the probability of being promoted in a few days
I say it with my hand on my heart!” said he, striking his chest.
Now he was a lieutenant of hussars, in a jacket laced with silver, and
embittered the relations between the commanders in chief, and even
“Directly! Directly! And you, Mamma?”
father to the ambassador’s entertainment; she wore a ball dress and

eyes to complete the show of prisoners, could not fail to attract his
calling on the Rostóvs for that purpose. The idea of throwing her
The smile vanished from Speránski’s white face, which was much
the Horse Guards.
CHAPTER IX
about it, and as the event results from the collective activity of
The hospital was in a brick building with some of the window frames and
“Count Ilyá Rostóv’s son?” asked Dolgorúkov.
help being aware of it, just as we cannot renew an illusion we have once
and they marched gaily. Some columns, supposing they had reached their
told him the whole field could be seen. Here he dismounted, and stopped
look of tender solicitude. She, having raised her head, was looking up
not intend to devote her life to serving Prince Bolkónski, to reading
composure, “now there’s this recruiting. My father is chief in
the wax figures would throw on the wall, when they heard the steps and
not do so at once, but continued to advance along the road at a walking

his plate, and proposed a toast, “To the health of the hero of our
The colonel deliberately stopped the regiment and turned to Nesvítski.

“Arakchéev and Golítsyn,” incautiously remarked Pierre, “are now the
activity, Túshin did not experience the slightest unpleasant sense of
Young Nicholas, now a slim lad of fifteen, delicate and intelligent,
where Nicholas had placed the kiss.
do.”
is the one held by the majority of people, and is the invariable fruit
and seize the apparently elusive—the life of a people. They described
and shouted rudely at the Russian general, asking: was he deaf that

Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, and the
it seemed to her she was penetrating the mystery.... But at the instant
beg—I’ll take it!”

    CHAPTER II
reappeared.
“come nearer—nearer. What news have you brought me? Eh? That Napoleon


    CHAPTER XXII
your duty to say that, but you don’t believe it yourself. I have
conversation, gave no reply.

probably unforeseen and not heard of by Napoleon). So not one of
and of our army.
be taken... where’s the hurry?”

naked shoulders. She did not give him the money, but let herself be
friendship. And that hurts me.” There were tears in her eyes and in her
these did not meet with success either. The theaters set up in the
must explain it, and he must hear me out,” thought the old prince.
“Bah, really? So much the better! You are certainly brave foes. The
a French soldier tugged at the other. He could distinctly see the
Wearing a waistcoat over his cotton shirt, Ferapóntov was standing
“You are cold. You are trembling all over. You’d better lie down,” said
“There’s no need for you to go at all,” said Denísov, addressing

then footsteps were heard. Natásha was looking at the mirror, but did
could not resist looking at them once more. Believing their danger past,
cost the lives of a hundred thousand Russians who died of cold and want

next day they moved the prince to Boguchárovo, the doctor accompanying
familiar, to get excited and to have arguments about extraneous matters

you again in happier circumstances. If you don’t want to make me blush,
looking for. After all, one must be human, you know....”

to him, and how they both retired into the pavilion. Since he had begun
barrel.”

concealment, or tried to extricate herself from her awkward position
“Why aren’t you asleep, sir?” said a Cossack who was sitting under a
see his face. Anna Mikháylovna left him, and when she returned he was
On the day of his rescue he had seen the body of Pétya Rostóv. That same
the others but win from you. Or are you afraid of me?” he asked again.
There is a rumor that you are thinking of peace. God forbid that you
a fight led Murat to try to deceive Kutúzov in a similar way. Meeting
began to express their opinions of him as people always do after a new
“Oh, well then, good-by: go and dress. Is he very terrible,

her work as if to testify that the interest and fascination of the story
particular about it.

“Well, my dear fellow, I was still living at home,” he began. “We had
work on its sides, that previously seemed dark, coarse, and meaningless,
“What book?”
“Not at all,” replied Nicholas as if offended at the idea. “As befits
“If we get to Vienna I’ll get rid of it there but in these wretched
a freshly roasted chicken, ham, preserves made with honey, and preserves
“He exists, but to understand Him is hard,” the Mason began again,
the will of God, modern history has given us either heroes endowed with
“Oh, what nonsense!” cried Natásha, laughing. “I don’t think

Denísov turned his horse on the officer.

saying.
impending battle, under a heading which he also read out:
exacting, so that without being a hardhearted man he inspired such fear
with him, tell him about his past, his life at home, and his love,
the abundance of it in the other—a spirituality he himself lacked and
“Mary,” he said softly, going up to her, “it will never happen again;
“There is still much, much before us,” he said, as if with an old
and fencing from the village.
be overthrown by the angel whom it has pleased the Almighty, in His
district where supplies were abundant.
went on, “is that our sovereign has given him full powers over all
and shrewd rulers of France, feeling that their part is played out, are
of Túshin’s battery. Prince Andrew followed with the suite. Behind
“Anybody can shove,” said the footman, and also began working his elbows
The beast wounded at Borodinó was lying where the fleeing hunter had
pineapple ice. Before the ices, champagne was served round. The band

the activity of individuals who ruled the people, and regarded the
and began dancing round the room with it.
negotiations.
tranquil as I am now.”
Moscou, la capitale asiatique de ce grand empire, la ville sacrée des

his handkerchief, and again: ‘Sergéy Kuzmích, From all sides,’...
of hearts. On the previous Sunday the old count had given his son
told him to expect.
What was needed was a sense of justice and a sympathy with European
grasped the cold door handle.

without realizing what he was doing. He smiled at the recollection of
many wrinkles on his large features, to Rostóv who was crimson with

successfully, of what he had thought while in the country.
received him tête-à-tête at his own house and talked to him long and
that her last chance of marrying has come and that her fate must be
two Alexanders—Bekleshëv and Narýshkin—which was a significant

the crowd moaned and heaved forward, but again paused.
The officer in the scarf dismounted, called up a drummer, and went with
farthest links of that chain. The tales passing from mouth to mouth at
inn, and a corn dealer’s shop in that province. He was a stout, dark,
one another.
be parted from her) would be gained, so pacifying himself with this
unpleasant to Prince Andrew to meet people of his own set in general,
these words as a direct challenge to the Emperor. He knew how Alexander
feels it is perishing and does not know what it is doing. To study the
thing was at an end, and they were already admiring her.

steps, and again stopped.

night. But now, in the solitude of the journey, they seized him with
amazed the French themselves. Rostóv was horrified to hear later that
evidently intending to express her sympathy with his sorrow, but Pierre

Just once, looking into those eyes to say...”

who, with his face buried in the ground and a blackened nape, lay on his
still more lively and he chatted incessantly all through dinner.
have to stay here yourself.”
cochon he had found in the kitchen. But as the captain had the wine they

“Of course I can.”
eating and talking among themselves, taking no notice of him.
But the Emperor and Balashëv passed out into the illuminated garden
you’ll carry her off—all right! Will they let it stop at that? It
he raised both arms as if carefully lifting some invisible but precious

is it for me, for me who desired his death, to condemn anyone?” she
usurper, the whole nation will certainly throw itself into the arms
he added: “I need good officers myself, need them myself!”

“I am afraid you’re going to your ruin,” said Sónya resolutely,
street, while others carried bundles of hay.
anything useful nor allow anything harmful. He understands that there is
     * “The principle of monarchies is honor seems to me
At that moment Nicholas and Countess Mary came in. Pierre with the baby
of her neutrality and draw her into the war; how part of that army was
understanding of the causes that led to the action.
the lodge. The majority of the Brothers, seeing in it dangerous designs
earth and which Princess Mary taught me and I did not understand—that is
sleeves of his fur cloak threw it on and got into his sleigh.
life from yours. I don’t wish to marry,” she answered positively,

his wealth, his education, and his social position had given him in his
he was surrounded, and talking, disputing, and joking began. When there
“He’s come, ma’am,” whispered the nurse.
his advice about Pétya’s education or Nicholas’ service. The

“Yes, yes, and so...?” Pierre kept saying as he leaned toward her with
At dinner, conversation turned on Pierre’s marriage.
“Your... your excellency,” stammered Alpátych and broke into sobs. “Are

affair of the Thabor Bridge, at Vienna.... They have crossed without
did not see you.”
into the shed.
taking part in a battle.
household. And there in fact was Sónya lying face downward on Nurse’s

him and, with a Christian mildness that expressed forgiveness of his
The doctor advised him to apply direct to Kutúzov.
Pierre took off his coat, waistcoat, and left boot according to the
gave us time to retreat. The retirement of the center to the other side

“Very good, very good,” said Bagratión. “Thank you, officer.”
brought into the room had vanished; and as if answering a question no
repeating. Rostóv listened and made out the word. It was “drink,
his feet and beseech him. He will lift me up, will listen, and will even
once was heard on the stairs. Forgetting the danger of being recognized,
criminal and at the same time pacify the mob.
Pierre did not answer, but looked cordially into the Frenchman’s eyes

I get reinstated.”
last few days. The antagonists stood forty paces apart at the farther
coming. And Nicholas, who had vainly suffered all the dread that
though he was evidently in high good humor, and he ordered these words
Guerrilla war (always successful, as history shows) directly infringes
crushed him during the executions, but which he had not felt during his
eyes, Rostóv re-entered that world of home and childhood which had no
be beaten. The pursuit of the Russian army, about which Napoleon was so

(She glanced at Hélène and smiled at her.) “My dear Hélène, be
rode side by side in front, at full gallop. One in a black uniform with

matter whether it is St. Nicholas or St. Blasius? You see it’s burned
and the arrangement of the gardens and completely breaking off his
the force of attraction is in inverse proportion to the square of the

The attendant made a hopeless gesture.
At the end of the letter she informed him that in a few days she would
It was past one o’clock when Pierre left his friend. It was a
apparition of a girl in a white chemise, dressing jacket, and nightcap.
He could hear shooting ahead of him. Cossacks, hussars, and ragged
before going to her father. The doctor came downstairs and went out to
gentleman of the bedchamber, and from that time he had begun to feel
“Who looks after the sick here?” he asked the assistant.
the address. “This letter would be of great use to you.”
opposite to it hung that bright comet which was connected in Pierre’s

Dólokhov, “and as for him, I won’t let him go on any account.”
two almost sleepless nights passed on a short sofa without bedding—all

“Only let me report this gentleman’s business, and I shall be at
settled down comfortably beside the fire.
Consequently, it would only have been necessary for Metternich,
later these same men left Moscow, they no longer formed an army. They



“Don’t talk about it, Natásha. It wasn’t your fault so why should

offensive, the plan of which, carefully prepared in accord with the

That one also passed. Then followed a cart unlike any that had gone
anything like it, you ought to give your wife a scolding! What are we

up against him. He wrote “800 rubles” on a card, but while the
were carried forward—and you did not look at the other page.”
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent

soon as the conversation concerned himself he would begin to talk
began. Count Ostermann with his suite rode up behind the squadron,

“No, wait a bit.... Oh, how funny you look!” cried Nicholas, peering
CHAPTER X
had been doing, as though it were all an old-time story, and he listened
“Platón Karatáev?” he repeated, and pondered, evidently sincerely
Nicholas and his wife lived together so happily that even Sónya and the
“Oh, yes!”
ruined houses and the streets. The Cossacks carried off what they could
“So you think he is powerless?” said Langeron.
Pierre hesitated.

wants to see you particularly. He asks you to come to him at once on a
The orderly had gone in before him and began waking somebody.
his collar as if escaping, was sitting almost asleep in a low chair,


surrounded by inquiring sympathizers, recounted his exploits.
that it must all be kept from her father and assuring her that nobody
A locomotive is moving. Someone asks: “What moves it?” A peasant says
“I’ll give them armed force... I’ll ‘overresist’ them!” uttered Rostóv
“O Lord! Oh, it will be the death of me! O Lord!” moaned the man in a
    CHAPTER IV
From one open shop came the sound of blows and vituperation, and just
lips as if to feel whether she was feverish, and finally kissed her.
which means the All. Talks with Brother V. strengthen, refresh, and
to her but to the movements of Mademoiselle Bourienne’s little
said the countess smiling.
Prince Andrew’s joyous feeling was considerably weakened as he
unwounded, with frightened faces, dragged themselves back to Mozháysk
face.
touched on this topic with his mother, he discovered, to his surprise

about Sergéy Kuzmích that interested Prince Vasíli just then, and
“We’re not willing. Let them ruin us! We won’t take your grain. We don’t
that his mission was accomplished; and at the same time he began to
her; and she should have kept him talking till cockcrow, but she got

consciousness.

which he had worn on his Italian campaign, sat on his small gray Arab
the hill not to go beyond the stream, but Rostóv pretended not to hear

Borís smiled circumspectly, so that it might be taken as ironical
“The Russians are very devout,” replied Balashëv.

he would have to die, he said to himself: “Well, what of it? So much the
“Yes, and he is over sixty. I hear the count no longer recognizes
countess’ fears still more by telling what she had seen at a spirit
wrathfully around, followed some twenty paces behind them.
“She loves you.”
such bad health, and now this vexation about his son is enough to kill
had not been content to take only one Frenchman or because he had slept
grandfather called him). The baby Prince Nicholas lived with his wet

nonsense, the chief thing is not to forget the important thing I
priests; “all we relatives have been in such anxiety. This young
big blazing campfire, around which sat several men talking noisily.
time prove Napoleon to be a product of the Revolution, of the ideas of
little bent, looked with beaming face at the princess without
recall your achievements this day with pride. Let it be said of each of
themselves naked to steam the lice out of their shirts.
These dispositions, of which the French historians write with enthusiasm
“Good day, your excellency!” he said, again holding out his hand to
continued to think aloud.
for a mere fancy?” said Nicholas taking her hand.
“This, you see, is how I am finishing my days... Death will come.

came to see me; she was an awful sight—looked as if she had put two
panic and less gossip,” ran the broadsheet “but I will stake my life on

Poniatowski’s collision with Túchkov; but these two were detached and
president of the council of war. Weyrother evidently felt himself to be
Nicholas did not think it the proper thing to visit her again; but all
lodged petitions for compensation.
Pierre was in an agreeable after-dinner mood. He looked straight before
If at first the members of the council thought that Kutúzov was

days later Prince Andrew received notice that he was to go to see the
Guard who, breathless with delight, galloped ahead to clear a path for
Hearing that Bezúkhov was in Orël, Willarski, though they had never been
Borís made a grimace.
Sónya said that Natásha was in her bedroom. Natásha was sitting on
Prince Andrew spoke so earnestly that Pierre could not help thinking
contraire m’être reconnaissante de ce que j’explique à Pierre
they should trouble about these things now when it can no longer be of
seized him at the thought of that dreadful step. A thousand times during
these things, but Nicholas and Natásha always brought him back to the
soldier. “I’ll teach you to push on!... Back!”
me, there’s a Circassian. Really, how becoming it is to dear Sónya.
his Persian adventures, and was leading a life of luxury, gambling, and
At that moment, as the Horse Guards, having passed him, disappeared in
contemptuous smile, evidently prepared beforehand to meet all objections

kept coming into her eyes. Anna Mikháylovna, with the letter, came on
The soldiers who had carried Prince Andrew had noticed and taken the

Nicholas to be saying.

the revenue from the Pénza estates which he had already mentally
asked to gain time.
later.
stupidest remarks came out clever and apt. Now everything Pierre said
“And where’s Nicholas?”
from the bonds of State and Church, a teaching of equality, brotherhood,
Rostóv and Ilyín hastened to find a corner where they could change into
down in an armchair and burst into tears.
“They’ve been saying so a long while,” said the count, “and

    CHAPTER XVIII
and gun carriages, the tramp of horses, the crack of whips, shouts, the
possible no one will ask me, that I shall not be among the first to
They knew their Natásha, and alarm as to what would happen if she heard
When he received the news of the battle of Borodinó and the abandonment
“Mary, dear, I think he is asleep—he was so tired,” said Sónya, meeting
Pierre, “I said at the time and before anyone else” (she insisted


“But they say that war has been declared,” replied the visitor.
see those who, judging by the sound of hoofs and voices, had ridden up
to the fords and the boats. Kutúzov himself had driven round by side
eyes. The sick man was turned on to his side with his face to the wall.
heart”—a statement which, though gathered from an unknown source,
up like a fool!” he thought, looking irritably at her. “She is
with faces distorted by suffering, walked, crawled, and were carried on
that you were Parisian! You have that... I don’t know what, that...” and

mind about Sónya?”
the more inevitability the less freedom.
those ladies.”
him.

I need not have said them,” he thought. “And then nothing would have
“Now then, you devil’s puppet, look alive and hunt for it!”


that Pierre tried to reply, but his jaw trembled and he felt tears
her face was a friendly and strangely roguish expression.
downy lip was open and she was smiling joyfully. Prince Andrew entered

explanation with Nicholas, Sónya twirled about before she left home
“Well, my dear fellow, tomorrow we are off at last,” said Prince


“Well? Has he been degraded into a field marshal, or into a soldier?

Anatole lay on the sofa in the study leaning on his elbow and smiling


the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
of the girl in white, obviously awaiting the beat to start singing with
with his hands, down which the grease trickled, Pétya was in an ecstatic
ordered to remain where they were, suddenly, seeing Russians
Duke’s orders the men had marched all the way in step (a practice on
right. Use the hatchet!... What—still alive?”
“I had not the pleasure of seeing you,” said Prince Andrew, coldly
heat and from running, he felt at that moment more strongly than ever

But Mávra Kuzmínichna stood at the closed gate for some time with moist
She did not let go of her mother but struggled tenderly with her,

Nicholas tried to say “Yes,” but could not: and he nearly burst into
for it; but when her youngest: the scapegrace who had been bad at
all his decisions and intentions. He went to Kurágin’s.
Nicholas did not reply and tried to avoid speaking of the princess any


of all our levies, both those now barring the enemy’s path and those
pleasing little blonde, the wife of one of the provincial officials.
batteries, and so on, and who was thought to be and was spoken of as
writing—not notes only but even new laws. My Andrew there has written
groaned, and slipped down into the arms of the Cossacks and adjutants
Anatole returned smiling to the ladies.
which they were present, and went to Iogel’s balls for young people
Pfuel was short and very thin but broad-boned, of coarse, robust build,
He had felt it for the first time when the shell spun like a top before
sausages and a bottle of wine.


“There now, your excellency! That’s the truth, the real truth,” said
cabman had told her that the people were breaking open the barrels at

“Well, yes,” said she, “it may be that he has other sentiments for me
little princess, and having asked for a needle began tracing the Condé
to do so. He could not have said by what standard he judged what he
attention on the Masonic manuscripts, but was unable to do so) the idea
Dessalles’ voice was heard outside the door asking whether little
apparently the sight of them roused no pleasant feeling in Véra.
And really he only ran a few steps alone. One soldier moved and then
I don’t want him.” (He looked at his blushing daughter.) “Are you
carry out all the doctor’s injunctions with precision, and that she
o’erpassed,” said an old priest to a lady who had taken a seat
historic characters and perceive the cause of the effect they produce
that negotiations for peace were already proceeding, and that he
increased crowd, dropped behind and returned to his tavern.
The stores, the prisoners, and the marshal’s baggage train stopped at
and beautiful building. I woke up. O Lord, great Architect of Nature,

unseen hand directed his actions.
CHAPTER VI
better understood by them. “By rights I am a militia officer, but my men
to her while she knitted. She rarely made an exception and went out to
says plainly: I am free and am therefore not subject to the law.


He did not know Arakchéev personally, had never seen him, and all he
    CHAPTER VI
them, but burned it instead.
will be empty,” said the old woman to the old attendant.
had noticed at their first halting place after leaving Moscow had now
“No, don’t... the island of Madagascar!” she said, and jumping off


were trying to pass over in silence simply because another, a very poor
battlefield.”
returned Prince Andrew, trying to resist Speránski’s influence, of
heiress.”
Natásha and whispered: “Well, what?”
holidays and Sónya’s love, had opened out to him a vista of tranquil
said that God, to reward or punish his people, gave Napoleon power and
up the numbers got 671. This was only five too much, and five was
“I’ll kill you!” he shouted, and seizing the marble top of a table

“Shall I call up our men from beyond the hill?” he called out.
did not jar on the general beauty but, lending themselves to the mood
bending over his saddlebow and hardly able to control his shying horse,
aides-de-camp to inquire after the count’s health, came himself

and after staying but a short time with the Tsar went to see the grand
“The Eighteenth.”

sobbed outright like a child and kept repeating:
candle beside him, the wick of which was charred and had shaped itself
march, and then in the same way it was impossible not to retreat another
thought occurred to him just because he himself desired a victim,

“There! There! Women’s fuss! Women, women!” said Alpátych, puffing and
regarding this period of the campaign the historians, who attributed
misfortune? And when did it begin? Such a little while ago I came to

especially commercial redistribution.
Without saying a word Rostopchín rose and walked hastily to his light,
While the guests were taking their leave Pierre remained for a long time
In consequence of this battle Kutúzov received a diamond decoration,
man about whom there was so much talk, but that on the contrary his
moment several voices began speaking together.

the adjutant—a handsome lad with long black curls arranged like Murat’s

that by not speaking of him” (she meant Prince Andrew) “for fear of not
centered round a single incident: Kutáysov’s death. Everybody knew
who asked as long as he had anything to give. Formerly he had been in a
authority, was the packing of the carpets. The count had valuable
“You have not yet seen my husband?”
the Bohemian mountains with. It’s a bad lookout, old fellow! But
Still smiling, she gracefully moved away, turning and glancing at her

“Sónya, go and wake him,” said Natásha. “Tell him I want him to

was pushing forward out of the wood. The count started and dropped the
badly through his spectacles, but that his wife’s connection with
Seeing them he kept thinking, “That may be the very standard with
door and his expression of sleepy indifference suddenly changed to one
Oh, how that chord vibrated, and how moved was something that was finest
unsatisfactory, but worst of all was his customary couch in the study.
The princess saw that her father regarded the matter with disapproval,
briskly exchanging shots with the enemy in the dale.
Andrew read the same mild reproach he had read on the face of his dead
dragging away the last logs from the huts and barns. Then they rode
The sound of bare feet splashing through the mud was heard in the
rise, and stillness reigned over the village and the house.


And so I pray God to have you, my friend, in His holy and powerful
themselves carried goods away with the help of their assistants. On the
Mílka and began rapidly gaining on the hare.

On the twenty-fifth of August, so his historians tell us, Napoleon spent
away somewhere, so as not to be near her. Soon after the Rostóvs came

in the possibility of being useful and in the possibility of happiness
action did Prince Bagratión, still hearing the cannonade in the center,
between a man who says that the people of the West moved on the East
done to me?”—said her charming, pathetic, dead face.
to the west, slaying their fellows.
In front of this position, they say, a fortified outpost was set up on
wheel, which merged in her memory with what followed.)
aside. Yells and shrieks of laughter rose from the whole regiment. But
did I hurry?”—Nicholas began to settle down in his old home world.
the shed, became quiet and with the baby in her arms went to the gate,
gradually weaker Pierre kept away from him. Pierre did not know why, but
addressing him as ‘Usurper and Enemy of Mankind.’”
that had been dragged out of the houses. Besides Russian families who
as merely due to the will of certain people. In regard to the migration
and that they must retreat, Kutúzov looked at him in silence.
had killed five Frenchmen, a third had loaded five cannon singlehanded.
done for a long time. Tears were in his eyes and in his throat when the
if it’s in my power...”
The Emperor drew level with Rostóv and halted. Alexander’s face was
listened with quiet irony to Bítski’s enthusiastic account of it. A
possessed his soul. He remembered that he had now a new source of
simple. The immense house on the old stone foundations was of wood,
important person. “Come, Nicholas! You know you let me call you so?”
point.”
In half an hour all was again in order, only the squares had become gray
feelings and reason, had to go from west to east to slay their fellows,


couple. In the intervals of the dance the count, breathing deeply, waved
in front of her leaning on his stick. “If you think something more is
He is here!” thought Rostóv, who had unconsciously returned to the
had time to secure quarters the soldiers ran out into the streets to
had been revealed to him.

“Mamma, darling, forgive me!”
But Natásha looked at her as if not understanding what was said to her

twenty-seven; red-faced, with a particularly red thick neck, glittering

soul. He paced through the ballroom, waited till everyone had come, and
seeing the favor the Emperor showed the prisoners, they now hastened to

you tell me that among some good things it contains others which our
the final proof that events had matured. The tightly coiled spring was
her. What do you think of it, my dear?”
    * Ours.


He sat down beside Hippolyte and wrinkling his forehead began talking
“Well, I won’t marry, but let him come if he enjoys it and I enjoy
self, and so before one can know, it is necessary to believe and to
into the valley. He greeted the men of the foremost regiment and gave
“Well, do you recognize your little madcap playmate?” asked the

express his devotion to his monarch except by cruelty.


everything was becoming more and more happy and animated. “Oh, how I
he shouted, “and then I shall reserve the right to state my opinion


eyes still shifted from side to side but with a downward look not rising

beaming smile to his head.

round at them all with crafty eyes.
noticed tears in his eyes.
mathematically clear, as it is that if when playing draughts I have one
The commander of the artillery of the 3rd Corps, General Fouché, will
of which could be seen in the failing twilight—and as if in reply the
cheerfully on this visit, at heart he felt afraid. He well remembered

with a sigh.
she was with Sónya. Sónya had cried and begged to be forgiven and now,
conversation, evidently with no wish to take part in it. He answered the
recovered her looks and is brighter. She sang a song. How easily some
“No, I mustn’t. I am so sorry for him! He’s so nice.”
man at once began pulling off his boots. The other in the frieze gown
provincials, and the very people they had entertained in Moscow without
he unhooked his saber. He came out from behind the chairs, clasped his

in Russia. The Petersburg Freemasons all came to see him, tried to
CHAPTER VII

And the hussars, passing along the line of troops on the left flank of
great achievement and great happiness.


down, he was surprised by the beauty of those ruins. The picturesqueness
clean handkerchief to wipe her charming hands, another spread a jacket
She ran to meet her, embraced her, and began to cry on her shoulder.
Kutúzov swayed his head, as much as to say: “How is one man to deal with
General Schmidt, who was killed in the action. His horse had been
in the sutler’s hut without his boots.” He recognized the agreeable,
to imbibe,” he said. “Can I receive that pure liquid into an impure
found the Prussian army. Borís, speaking with deliberation, told them
unfortunate, a stranger, alone, helpless! And, oh God, how passionately
can be happy and entirely free, so there is no condition in which he


“Countess...” said Denísov, with downcast eyes and a guilty face.
describe it,” she had said, flushed and excited. Prince Andrew smiled

abandoned since the ball. Having finished her morning tea she went to
a gray swallow-tail coat with a star on the breast, and evidently still
pressed two fingers more and more rigidly to his cap, as if in this
Alpátych been to you? Has he spoken to you of going away?” she asked.
in his coffin with his chin bound up with a white handkerchief. And the
reason, or shot a post-boy’s horse with a pistol. That expression
“And you, Theodore, get me a piece of chalk.”
a few weeks previously, on that hot August day, such bodies had filled
ago.”
argued, it was only because he wished to maintain his independence and
joy.

ought to have occupied her thoughts now. She was roused from her reverie
someone’s eye.

gallant... with the fair” (he winked and smiled), “that’s what the



by the commander in chief. Despite the un-Russian appearance of the
involuntarily listening, with downcast eyes, to the sounds of firing.
first regiment roared “Hurrah!” so deafeningly, continuously, and
left but to die?” he thought. “Well, if need be, I shall do it no
“It’s that, that...” said Sónya, with a white face and trembling lips.
they’re engaged....”
replacing them by a new conception, and the logic of the situation has


mystery is of such a nature that nobody can know or use it unless he be
him with pleasant smiles when he talked to the old prince.
lower part of it something quivered.
he had not thought about it until that moment. The officers’ laughter


workbag.”
had contrived to remain at headquarters after the changes. He had

lost sight of her, took the seat himself. Anatole sat down behind her.
no notice and allowed himself to reply that: ‘We in France pay no
Pétya badly wanted to laugh, but noticed that they all refrained from

the more heated became the disputes, culminating in shouts and


were sitting at the table on which a plan was spread out.
inn, where two roads parted. Both of them led downhill and troops were

their language, to grasp the hidden meaning of their words, and felt
appeared on his nose, the redness of which was evidently due to
Next morning Márya Dmítrievna took the young ladies to the Iberian
of the city was that they could see. A third officer, who by his accent
like method of enlightenment. Our Order imitates the ancient societies
stories over and over again to the same audience.
“No, but what is it, my dear? Do you want me to go and tell him?”
A few minutes later an officer came hurriedly out of the front door,
was about, went across the room to where Pierre was standing and gave
“What is it? A petition?”
rest, went in to dinner. He was seated in the place of honor between
He entered the drawing room with his usual alert step, glancing rapidly
to gallop—the other sleighs followed. The shaft horse swung steadily
“And our little tea table?”
Mikháylovna and snatching the portfolio from her.

out of her sight.

room.
censured, should not be held to blame.
like the light of heaven, and from the blessed Mother’s cheek it drops
“Nothing. You mustn’t cry here,” he said, looking at her with the same
Bolkhovítinov gave a detailed account from the beginning of all he had
recalled thousands of such hints from Prince Vasíli and others, and was

offensive.
All these nobles, whom Pierre met every day at the Club or in their own
another. All became silent and turned to look at the pale tear-worn Anna
how to behave with her. The evening before, in the first happy moment of
“Come now, Count, you know!”

count.” She entered the room with resolute steps. Natásha lying on the

himself at the head of the army, gather round him a commander in chief’s
too must give expression to her feelings.

Pierre by the arm and pointed to a round, graveled space where a
“Made, made me an offer, Mamma! Mamma!” she exclaimed.
difficulty that had presented itself to the colonel). “Charmed to
“I beg you to excuse me, excuse me! God is my witness, I did not
to retreat to Sventsyáni and destroy any provisions they could not carry

sufficient ground for this affair, or for blood to be shed over it....
landowner in the Vílna province, offered his country house for the fete,
to make out the pattern.

arrived at them clung to them tenaciously. When Pierre himself wanted to
her she was not vexed with these people.
“Yes, she is right,” thought the old princess, all her convictions
society woman to be buried in the country during the best years of her
on my heels, putting my arms round my knees like this, straining tight,
people do understand him. He is such a lofty, heavenly soul!”
while with his regiment in Poland, a Polish landowner of small means had
to meet him. I embraced him and kissed his hands, and he said, “Hast

heart! You are a Madame de Genlis and nothing more” (this nickname,
“No, no! A thousand times no! I shall never agree with you,” said
because there was nothing to reproach her with. She had all that people
had happened so quickly proved that it had not come from God to whom he
work nearer to her.
Rostóv stopped.

he meant to do, and abandoning herself to him followed his lead hardly
sobbing, he asked her and his absent son to forgive him for having

prince told me to ask,’ and come and tell me her answer.”
On the tenth of August the regiment Prince Andrew commanded was marching
despite the general’s presence were talking loudly and gesticulating.
It was already late when he rose after sealing the letter. He wished
“Blockhead! Why do you come in without being called?” cried Nicholas,
accomplished.
incalculable wealth, is in Napoleon’s hands. The Russian army, only half


Countess Mary listened till he had finished, made some remark, and in
the smoke which the wind carries away.
another, like bubbles rising in water.
surroundings unable to find their own regiments. In this way the action
and donned his cap.
learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and
“while you do nothing but laugh.”

general aspect was unchanged. The old footman, who met Pierre with a

would come when there would be no more wars. The old prince disputed it


was questioned as to who he was, where he had been, with what object,
before him but the motionless earth and the stubble around him. There
“I know it and shall prove it,” said Rostóv.

nonrecognition of something absolute, serving as the measure of visible
campaign over the whole map of Russia.
“There they are... bringing her, coming... There they are... They’ll be
rapidly from an approaching thundercloud, so, as if in opposition to
Borís promised to fulfill her wish and was about to begin a
with the mother made careful inquiries as to Julie’s dowry (she was
from actions which would torment him afterwards.”
Natásha whose radiant, happy expression—of which he was conscious



there will be no more war! Old women’s nonsense—old women’s
“What is it, Natásha?” said Princess Mary.
astronomy, far from destroying, even strengthens the foundation on which
     * “Don’t see it that way, that’s the trouble.”
young Nicholas, who had gone into my study and broke all my things.”
had expected, at his first glance at her his face assumed a cold, stiff,
beautiful, thoughtful eyes, then his uplifted, rosy upper lip trembled
When she began to tell him that all this had happened the day after her
“It is some letter of recommendation... what the devil do I want it
exactitude. He always came to table under precisely the same conditions,
concealed from them but comprehensible to us. Such is the inevitable
about him, conscious of having said much that was amiss, he again got
others, evidently does not equal the resultant, namely the phenomenon
comrades.
CHAPTER XVI
and freezing, surrendered in crowds, and when (as the historians relate)
dancing. An aide-de-camp, the Master of Ceremonies, went up to Countess
need of re-establishing les bons principes, and to the diplomatists of

position impossible and therefore could not go to fight, fully convinced
previously, is quite baseless, which again shows that Napoleon’s cold on
Emperor gives it and next day Napoleon. Tomorrow our Emperor will send
the next vacancy, for his mother now clung to him as her one hold on
Pierre looked at his friend and, noticing that he did not like the
And by some latent sequence of thought the descent of the Mozháysk hill,
effrayée, as he called it, shoes, and silk stockings.
drone population of the army began blowing hard that way, so that it
During their long conversation on Wednesday evening, Speránski more
concerning which no one could be at ease. It was the state of the
this strange, unexpected happiness of meeting again the very man she had



     * (2) “When in doubt, my dear fellow, do nothing.”
“There is still time, my dear. You must remember, Catiche, that it was
but shouldn’t we get the gypsy singers as well? You military men like
“It’s not true, not true!” cried Pierre. “I am not to blame for being
The cart was loaded high, and at the very top, beside a child’s chair
“Look, look!” said this adjutant, looking not at the troops in the

them rest and leisure?” said Pierre, hurrying and lisping. “And

pity, and for their sake I should like to liberate the serfs. You
farther and farther off, the black horses driven by Zakhár could be
expecting that he would have a chance to give a reliable account, which
as in Michael Ivánovich’s list.”
    CHAPTER XIX
dissatisfaction and reproach. “Old though he may be, he should not, he
checked handkerchief) to illustrate the theory that all men are equals,

life and place of residence, their acquaintances and ties, Natásha’s
“He is a great tactician!” said the prince to his son, pointing to
once to the general on duty.”


imagine how he would have arranged things in this or that battle—the
him, carried the infant round the battered tin font and handed him over
I’m alive, that is not my fault, so I must live out my life as best I
one another than she had ever been to any man. Natásha kept turning to

of you for a long time: first from your action with regard to your
The dispositions drawn up by Weyrother for the battle of Austerlitz were
the soldiers.
passion and stifles truth. On the one hand there is fear and regret for
that he was dangerously wounded.
is, outside time, which is impossible.
the staff officer on duty.
here by the Stone Bridge, and you know there was a large icon of God
The generals were passing by, looking as if they wished to avoid
such a look of cold dignity. He did not know that Natásha’s soul was
occupy a position he had not himself chosen, because the popular demand
constrained and ill at ease.
details of his disaster he understood that half the campaign was lost,
been up to heaven only knows what! And they have had to suffer for it.

The postilion started, the carriage wheels rattled. Prince Hippolyte
painful, but, loving my benefactor and sovereign, I submit. Only I am
Mademoiselle Bourienne alone smiled agreeably.
smile, said to him:
like “Uncle’s.” “That’s a good player of ours,” she added.
there is hope that he may consent to reduce the term by four months.”
lined with fox fur, that had once been smart, and dirty hempen convict
without waiting for it to be accepted took leave of absence and went to
CHAPTER XIV
“Well, then, you know,” Nicholas went on, growing hot at the mere
and found all sorts of reasons for this decision. A whole series of
princess had caught a glimpse of the man she had known and loved, and it



“A bit touched—I always said so.”
Kutúzov, whom he had formerly praised (it was excusable for him in his
question arose in every soul: “For what, for whom, must I kill and be
allowed to speak, turns to Auersperg with feigned astonishment (he is a
In 1806 Pfuel had been one of those responsible, for the plan of
Suddenly he sniffed and put his face closer to the window.
    CHAPTER XIV

“Yes,” he said, softly and distinctly. “Russia has perished. They’ve
inform him of the facts, in her son’s presence, but unable to restrain

her, she is so much to be pitied, so much to be pitied.”
attention.
at the period of youth when there seems so much to do that there is no

She nodded to the dressmaker, whom she knew and who had curtsied
“more-orderers” had really been at their village, but that Tíkhon
“Where have you been? To Kiev?” Prince Andrew asked the old woman.
and she with him, that there was quite a scandal and that that’s why
“Ou-rou-rou!” yelled the crowd, echoing the crash of the collapsing roof
Mary—“Haven’t you read it?”
Directly Rostóv entered the door he was enveloped by a smell of

On the twenty-fourth of August the battle of the Shevárdino Redoubt was
Sónya, blaming himself and commending her. He had asked Princess Mary to
Pierre—have talked and laughed about this. So it’s all right.” And
fro with dignity, offered surmises about the weather, or touched on
“That’s a good thing, but don’t move from Prince Vasíli’s. It
replied, “and it is that He would be merciful to him and would allow
horses were harnessed. They were both pale, and the superintendent of
and passionate desire to give herself entirely to helping them. It was
I’m young, and I know that now I am good. I used to be bad, but now I
“Your excellency, the superintendent of the lunatic asylum has come:
first seized Nicholas and the others that she might not do the right
Anatole lived, Pierre entered the lighted porch, ascended the stairs,
shown itself during her father’s illness. She wished to pray but did not
And patting Berg on the shoulder he got up, wishing to end the

and the roads became impassable. For days neither provisions for the

too remembered the word pink being used, and saw in this the most
particular part of the work on his estate. He always had before his

I envy him, but you want to make him what I am, without giving him my
“Nonsense, I tell you. Your mother’s milk has hardly dried on your lips

Nicholas Rostóv turned away and, as if searching for something, gazed
To a lackey no man can be great, for a lackey has his own conception of
“What is it you have got into your heads, eh?... What are you thinking
mention, and which you think is the result of your own mental efforts,

on the village and turn the enemy’s position.

an explanation, but meeting the latter’s impressive but meaningless
Pierre glanced round at the speaker and saw that it was a soldier who
and ruined the people of Smolénsk and Moscow and were killed by them.
buildings—schools, hospitals, and asylums—on all the estates
undercurrents were acting strongly and nearing an eruption.
smile mean when he said ‘chosen already’? Is he glad of it or not?
stalls everyone clapped and shouted “bravo!” Then one of the men
hear?”
human desires. And with this aim, in one of her talks with her Father

two seconds. Whether or no the Emperor understood what was going on in

superiority of his opponent and of his own impotence was gained by the


fell heavily on to the wet ground. The Cossacks saw that his arms and
what difficulty the father had dragged his legs upstairs while the son
eye socket. “Yes, he has a right to speak so calmly of those men’s

to himself, but which formed the whole interest of his life,
“The king’s heart is in the hands of the Lord.”
   Ah lost, quite lost... is my head so keen,
ridiculous, and unpleasantly sarcastic, but yet he inspired involuntary
conditions of life was but little noticeable. As to the serfs the only
Old Prince Bolkónski heard all the rumors current in the town from
about the army and about the enemy who was already attacking the town,
did not know where to go. Lázarev stopped, casting a sidelong look at
facing the quartermaster who was reporting to him. On seeing Rostóv,
“I can tell you more,” continued Prince Vasíli, seizing her hand,
dress spread out and seemed to flash as she whirled round. Natásha
superfluity. And now during these last three weeks of the march he had
said Natásha.
even Napoleon, could say anything against that truth which they all


observation, reason and the will are merely secretions of the brain, and
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
One of them was a sallow, clean-shaven civilian with a thin and wrinkled
on side by side. Natásha, muffled up in shawls which did not hide her
between forefinger and thumb, and an old servant, bending over from
Nesvítski. Count Ilyá Rostóv with the other members of the committee
so all roads lead to Moscow: there were many roads, and “among them the


to its utmost limit.

of frost, when there were only seven or eight hours of daylight and
It was becoming dangerous to remain in Boguchárovo. News of the approach

as they have heard it described by others, and as sounds well, but not
various kinds: a table, chairs, and a clavichord. One adjutant, nearest
“So you think we shall win tomorrow’s battle?” asked Pierre.

at Natásha. The curtain had not yet risen and the overture was being
His face expressed entreaty, agitation, and ecstasy. Countess Mary
there—those stockings are to be a surprise for me.”
“Yes, I know,” said Countess Mary. “Natásha told me.”
“Oh, Papa! how nice you look! Charming!” cried Natásha, as she
most instructive phenomena in history.
immediately brightened on seeing Rostóv. “Schön gut Morgen! Schön
His Serene Highness has passed through Mozháysk in order to join up with

relate to a whole series of events occurring over a period of years or
the trouble I have put you to,” said Pierre, and seeing Savélich smile,
The leaders, these historians tell us, express the will of the people:
him but to the whole regiment—all of us—you’re to blame all round.


Nicholas began pacing up and down the room.


Soon after “Uncle’s” reappearance the door was opened, evidently
Napoleon, predestined by Providence for the gloomy role of executioner
of the way! Make way!”
aggrandizement of the great man. It is not Napoleon who prepares himself
band struck up in the gallery, and the guests settled down in their
uniform rushed on him sword in hand, shouting something. Instinctively
when they went in. In her snug room, with lamps burning before the icon
open bureau with screened candles, holding a paper in his outstretched
pictured herself by Theodosia’s side, dressed in coarse rags, walking

“All wight! All wight!” shouted Denísov. “It’s no good making
name!” would be given him: and he knew that even when it was said
that somebody actually submitted such a proposal to him. But a commander

“I am sure of it, sure!” Natásha almost shouted, taking hold of both his

confided diplomatic secrets to her, so that in a way Hélène was a
informed him that the princess had gone to her own apartments, and that
more insight than at any other time, and understood all that is worth
full vigor is an aim was for her evidently merely a pretext.
surroundings, but now he felt disinclined to go to it.
and without communicating to the generals around him the profound
difficulty repress the sobs that rose to her throat. He said something,
rapidly become the fashion. He was enormously tall, handsome, amiable
form a clear conception of the man. Pfuel was one of those hopelessly




There were masses of wealth and there seemed no end to it. All around
with Petersburg, and so on. But the destruction of the French, which he
hast thou denied?” he suddenly asked with exulting austerity and
The soldier fell, got up, and ran away. But his comrade, throwing down
one I’d give my life for her! But those!...” and he made a gesture
of the knoll he was met by a dense crowd of Russian soldiers who,

demanded a pillow and hot water, and unfastened and tore open her
anxiety.
the battle was actually fought, this position, protected by the river
Of the three precepts of Freemasonry Pierre realized that he did not
failure and supposing that someone must be responsible for it, Toll
experiencing the joyful feeling of a boy escaping from school, began to
Kutúzov as they had done the day before, they condemned him as the cause
himself for love and a feeling of envy of the legitimate husband.
Kámenka, where an unfrocked priest was in readiness to perform a
Dolgorúkov; and though you may not know it, the fact is that now
desperation slammed the door with all her might.
“Here it is!” thought he, seizing the staff of the standard and
Major-General Grékov with two Cossack regiments decided to go with the
market stalls, granaries—for the most part still stocked with goods—and
something...” said Natásha and pausing added, “something fine?”
from Prince Andrew in Switzerland in which he gave her strange and

dragoons’ disordered lines. One Uhlan stopped, another who was on foot
have the courier horses. It was plain that he was lying and only wanted
no use to anyone.”
The same happy, rapturous faces turned to the shaggy figure of Denísov.
said to herself. Little Andrew, her eldest boy, imitating his mother,
would be for astronomy.
and gave the order to do what he regarded as useless and harmful—gave
thoughts,” she added, addressing Natásha.
and immutably self-confident men, self-confident to the point of
“Yes, do. You’ll see everything from there and it’s less dangerous, and
understand and state the patient’s condition.
about? His former love? The little princess? His disillusionments?...
afraid of wasting his store of anger, he left Alpátych and went rapidly
the enemy was, might have arranged some more advantageous plan and
pride. This icon of the Venerable Sergius, the servant of God and
“I did not... What is it all about?” inquired Prince Andrew
who because of those tears quite forgave Natásha’s joy.



“Dear me! there’s no recognizing them! And Natásha! See whom



that it might not occur to her to speak of his share in the affair of

information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page
“The count had a sty,” replied the adjutant smiling, “and was very much
wounded Bolkónski, and the doctor had to admit that he had not expected
softened, happy, timid look she watched the boy she loved in the arms
Kutúzov, but the latter moved his hand angrily and Kaysárov understood
at once consented to Pétya’s request and went himself to enter his name.


“Where are headquarters?”
with what he saw and experienced in the army, but at the same time
“Dites donc, le colonel Gérard est ici?” * he asked.
He paused a little while.
“Well, then, I won’t; only forgive me, Sónya!” He drew her to him
We say that Napoleon wished to invade Russia and invaded it. In
morose, paced up and down in front of the Kámmer-Kollézski rampart,
being gloomy. For the same reason they are always hard at work and in a
When they came out onto the beaten highroad—polished by sleigh runners
Dólokhov’s words into English. A thin young lad, an hussar of the

powerful process of thought and feeling must have been going on in
Next day Rostóv saw Denísov off. He did not wish to stay another

could remember it and weep or pray.
changing into a Polish uniform, he drove to the riverbank in order to
“To the left!... Keep to the right!” the men shouted to him.
Already then, directly I saw him I felt something peculiar.”
“Crew, to your guns!” commanded the officer.


your father.”
an oath of fidelity to the laws of the Order. The candles were then
For the last two days, ever since leaving home, Pierre had been living

all felt that this was really a council of war. The conversations all

corps, which Bennigsen and others may have had in view; nor the aim of
pulse, added: “You are not well, my dear fellow. Think what you are
The Emperor’s displeasure with Kutúzov was specially increased at Vílna
realized as he read that book: the joy, hitherto unknown to him,
father’s pardon for herself and for Philip the footman, who had begged
In a moment the men came running gaily from their campfires and began
was saying.
he began to wriggle and twitch his body and utter piercing, ringing,
Livonian gentleman should propose marriage to a Countess Rostóva; but

when one of the aides-de-camp rode up to them.
young son, resting on him and winking joyfully at him. Young Rostóv

stood in the midst of an overgrown garden and, after a glance at his
them to get him the book and put it under him.
Heaven that the Almighty may exalt the race of the just, and mercifully
pursuit, the barring of the way, or any other particular conditions.
The postmaster, his wife, the valet, and a peasant woman selling
formed in which float the diplomatists, who imagine that they have
The absorption of the French by Moscow, radiating starwise as it did,
continuing. “That is not enough, I told them. Something else is needed.

“Your excellency, they say they have got ready, according to your

But at that moment Berg came to Pierre and began insisting that he
mental state. The unaccustomed coarse food, the vodka he drank during

so the conception of the action of a man subject solely to the law of
strains of Daniel Cooper (somewhat resembling those of a merry peasant
toward the wood, just as Karáy had run to cut the animal off. As
with Napoleon Bonaparte and from all the schemes of reconstruction.

Willarski, whom Pierre had known slightly in Petersburg society, came
march there and there,” and so on; and on paper, all these columns
lid, and made desperate efforts herself.
shared their opinion, but for that very reason he could not understand
attentive to him. Count Cyril Vladímirovich is your godfather after
longtemps.” *

and though the “God’s folk” who came to see her reported, in their own

darkness, and the drummer boy came to the door.

paralyzed his will.
the Petersburg Berëzina plan would be attributed to Kutúzov led
his time. But he is growing old, and though not exactly cruel he has too
the felt boots approached the unseen bend of the staircase more rapidly.
use of whatever interest he had to offer. He himself carefully scanned
understand the self-abnegation of our Emperor who wants nothing for
voice.
he stopped short on his heels, stood so a second, stamped on the spot
not having done so, she again passed in fancy to the time when she was


After Anna Mikháylovna had driven off with her son to visit Count Cyril
stumbling, tripping up, and shouting, ran merrily and wildly toward
me that you would not abandon Moscow without another battle; all this
each time is saved in an unexpected manner. Owing to various diplomatic
brushed up into a huge shock. He stood in full view of the audience,
And Natásha kissed her brother and ran away.
“You were saying, Mr. Staff Officer...” continued the colonel in an

“Well, then, old chap, mon très honorable Alphonse Kárlovich,”
“Can this be death?” thought Prince Andrew, looking with a quite new,
Cossacks did not capture Napoleon then, what saved him was the very
the clever though shy, but observant and natural, expression which

“Still aching?” Túshin asked Rostóv in a whisper.
expression. “C’est... c’est du Mack. Nous sommes mackés (It is...
all by himself. Pierre stopped laughing, got up, went farther away from
footmen and footmen in plumed hats. From the carriages emerged men
Italy and on the Rhine; how fifty thousand Russians and as many English
attire appeared at the door. Willarski, stepping toward him, said
let her know.”
quiet, long, easy yet resolute lope.

Though Pierre, Natásha, Nicholas, Countess Mary, and Denísov had much to
    CHAPTER XX
a green jacket, who was moaning piteously. Another criminal, thin and
gave an order, and the dragoons formed up in line. The crowd moved
waters of the distant Danube shone. And fairer still were the faraway
the Karágins’! Please come! No! Really, eh?” said he.
I am told.”
this man receives a daughter of the Caesars into his bed; the Pope, the
heard ahead. “Forward by the left. Walk, march!” came the order from in

right sounded oftener and nearer. As soon as Túshin with his guns,

“Always some fantastic schemes,” said Nicholas.
a kind no longer in general use. Prince Andrew remembered the story of
promener,” * she used to say. Often seeing the success she had with
him, but Prince Andrew replied that he would probably soon be back again
“Honestly, without speaking of what I owe you, I feel friendship for

impressions—such as the retreat from Smolénsk, his visit to Bald Hills,

Prince Vasíli did not reply, though, with the quickness of memory and

the head that he was considering this information.
“Lord have mercy upon us!” she repeated while seeking her daughter.
to cry.
stretcher into which his head had sunk deep and again his eyelids
on himself. He could remain silent for hours without being at all put
She turned to go, but he stopped her with a gesture and took an uncut
“That’s not the point, my dear.”
“My dear,” said Princess Mary, addressing her brother from beside
happen!” she said, looking at herself in the glass. “How shall I
force nothing had seemed to him strange or dreadful: neither the corpse
had first learned to say “pear” and then “granny,” that this son
where politics, poetry, and philosophy were discussed. At these parties
“Only, for Christ’s sake...” the girl went on, as Natásha,
“Your excellency, it’s the officer Dólokhov, who has been reduced
face with his hand so as to look into her eyes.
“Or are you afraid to play with me?” Dólokhov now asked as if
“Well, nephew, you’re going for a big wolf,” said “Uncle.”

rise, but could not do so on account of his weakness and weight. His
long-drawn shout and rapid musketry firing could still be heard. A few
and went himself.

He tried to remember whether he had not done anything else that was
to the Rostóvs that the prince was not receiving, but that the princess
I was to blame for not understanding her, for not understanding that
Swaying his head and smiling as if amused at himself, the officer ran
sufficiently weakened to be successfully attacked. But still he did not
cavalry and here he noticed a stir and signs of preparation for battle;
resting against the other which was doubled under him. He screwed up his
supposed to be a man of genius—Speránski. And this movement of
boy to come downstairs.
Next day he came early, dined, and stayed the whole evening. Though
every eye she met now was immediately dropped.
standards. “Lower, lower, that’s it. Hurrah lads!” he added, addressing

that the gates of the citadel had been barricaded and that there was

inquiringly at Pierre.
at first, the hoarfrost on the dusty grass, the Sparrow Hills, and the
incontestable. Certains droits et privilèges de la noblesse me

people look at their work.
rain, he repeated: “Now then, now then, go on! Pelt harder!”
father, pensively watching the lights of the street lamps flickering on
was large and of an old pattern. The French swarming round their guns


except by a great effort, to realize the danger and the difficult
know the number of your battalions as exactly as I know my own. You have
“My poor husband is enduring pains and hunger in Jewish taverns, but the
got out of their carriage at the chapel, the sultry air, the shouts of
round his son’s neck, and without a word he began to sob like a child.
his having been picked up on the battlefield by the people of the
continuously in an atmosphere of campaigning and war—can understand the


come to Pokróvsk at the beginning of his operations and had as usual
smile and said: “Poor fellows, they don’t know that I am leaving them
arrest me for my civilian clothes? Surely not! He would understand on
beyond the Niemen.”
“That, my dear, you must ask the doctor,” he replied, and again making
and kissed her.
bank, hesitating to step onto the ice. The general on horseback at the
dare to, dared not in her present state of mind address herself to God.
opportunity since morning to meet one another alone. When Princess Mary
having mounted drew himself up very straight and tall and rode to the


He flushed joyfully yet with painful distress. He tried to hide his
CHAPTER III


replied that it was true that a woman needs variety, and the same thing
window. He wished to take leave of Princess Mary, but she would not let

“He’s cook to some prince.”

evoked by the memory of the time when the paper he was now reading had
whom I mention this, because I like you.”
cry or to laugh. Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders and frowned, as
crowd had to wait.
decided to play until that score reached forty-three thousand. He
all to him and, will you believe it, placed us in front of the icons.
the esaul with an air of importance about tomorrow’s undertaking, that


“If he is one of the ordinary little staff dandies sent to earn a


go and tell Lise.”
officer Bagratión.
Bazdéev’s widow had called to ask Pierre to take charge of her husband’s
“I will speak to her when I have your consent.... Do you give it to
His life meanwhile continued as before, with the same infatuations and
monk he received and had a long talk with.”

in the evening,” reported Rostóv, stooping forward with his hand at
advantageous match but a splendid, noble fellow... he is my friend...”
external shock was needed to overcome that shame, and this shock came in
had been carried out and in what state were the serfs whom God had
wounded officer?”
of hay or anything. You see, we were going away, so he would get it all;
Prince Andrew’s last days had bound Princess Mary and Natásha together;

German’s self-assurance is worst of all, stronger and more
flanks of the battery that is to bombard the entrenchment on the left,
diary? There could be no doubt not only of his approval but also of his
whole hospital, with arms and legs torn off and its dirt and disease. So
firing incendiary balls at the village of Schön Grabern visible just


“Let him do it, let him do it,” said Dólokhov, smiling.
The soldiers laughed. A moment later, an adjutant arrived with the same
the room.
“Ah, how annoying!” he muttered. “I should have come yesterday.... Ah,
homes and go to Moscow and to get carts ready for tomorrow morning
religion.
Túshin rose and, buttoning his greatcoat and pulling it straight,
and that the greatest happiness is at first! On the contrary, now is
baggage train, the artillery, and columns of troops were defiling
continued Dólokhov, as if he found particular pleasure in speaking of
Likhachëv got up, rummaged in his pack, and soon Pétya heard the warlike
into the town, the cocks were already crowing. Pierre went on with the
through the door.
members of this party, chiefly civilians and to whom Arakchéev belonged,
and went to the door.

Princess Mary sighed, and the expression on her face said: “Yes,
Krásnoe and Orshá.

“Why, don’t you hear it?” Rostóv asked again, after waiting for a
shouting came from, a fire flared up and went out again, then another,
room.


what they told her, and convinced that say what she might she would
his whole body and eagerly listened to her story. “Yes, yes... so he
asked and answered at the same instant. He was alone in the middle of a
once seemed good, ten years later seems bad, and vice versa. And what is
“You have earned the St. George’s standards and will be worthy of
put into execution. Natásha had promised to come out to Kurágin at the
the city and now at the plan, considering its details, and the assurance
the cubs and the borzois three. The huntsmen assembled with their booty

Karatáev looked at Pierre with his kindly round eyes now filled with
occurred, Princess Mary and Natásha were present.
Pierre.
her father’s illness began (perhaps even sooner, when she stayed with
what had happened. He alone then understood the meaning of the French


a sign of approaching anger. “I was forgetting... Do you wish it
standing, when just above his head he heard several voices shouting


enthusiasm with which he spoke of women. Though all Ramballe’s love
swaying in the gloom of the night. The lower stakes cracked more and
and regained her former position.
their marriage, then he threatened that if she molested Sónya he would
“So it is! It is!”
town news, and now the latest political gossip.
prominent gray eyes. Then she shook her head and glanced up at the icons

pet them a bit,” said Márya Dmítrievna, touching her goddaughter and
By association of ideas, Pierre was at once carried back to the day
home. Difficult and strange as it was for him to reflect that he would

gateway.
the general... third company to the commander.” The words passed along
“To be a soldier, just a soldier!” thought Pierre as he fell asleep,
“Is that so? And what did he say?” inquired Bolkónski.
to head off the wolf, and the borzois passed it, running faster still.

now realizing the danger to the old count, Nicholas, and Prince
eyes rolling as he sang, with his small, husky, but true voice, some
“Do not think, however,” she wrote, “that my father is

to say that. Only this, then: whatever may happen to you when I am not
it’s not all the same to us! Am I not right, Denísov? It’s not the

From the standpoint from which the science of history now regards its
activity, whirring, and chiming in the higher spheres.
To the left down below in the mist, the musketry fire of unseen forces
distraction caused by the thought of Kurágin. During the first four
panting little nag where Pierre stood, it was damp, somber, and sad.

which had been moved forward and was in action, deafening them with the

power—existing immutably outside time—is, but to history’s questions
was going home to Vorónezh and Rostóv persuaded him to travel with him

they were in the carriage. “He hardly recognizes anybody.”
In the meantime, not only was it known in the maidservants’ rooms that
table was moved up to him with savory beef tea, or when he lay down for
been waiting for.” And bursting into tears she hid her face in her
trembling hands turned toward himself the bloodstained, mud-bespattered
seen. The lines of that mouth were remarkably finely curved. The middle
in French, beginning: “My dear Mamma,” and ending: “Your obedient
commander in chief. The activity of a commander in chief does not at all
Mary, having taken and closed the exercise book with the next day’s
The theory of the transference of the will of the people to historic

with the thought that no one would ever know it and that she would not
he reflected. “Why? But perhaps I shall go. What a good fellow he is and
awful!”


their former disharmony and her own jealousy recurred to her mind.
demanded anything of him or sent him anywhere. He had all he wanted:
district, not a soldier or officer was left. Men in military uniforms
in, the wooden roof was collapsing, and the rafters were alight. The
dissipations of town life, in wine, in heroic feats of self-sacrifice,
him. The sword cut on his arm could scarcely be called a wound. He
(always followed by a ball flying past and striking the earth, a man, a
gathering of Speránski’s intimate acquaintances already assembled
he was dealing with. “Der alte Herr” (as in their own set the Germans
captain of the 13th Light Regiment—was undoubtedly a very great deed.
muttering something with his helpless tongue, twitching his gray
expression of that wish, but find a series of orders, or expressions of

sign that they fully understood one another.
the scouts all say the same thing.”
a mass because the spirit of the army had so fallen that only the mass
landowners that remained unknown. A sacristan commanded one party which
on the field.
“Now then! Nearly ready? You’re dawdling!” he shouted to the

And twisting the ramrod he looked gloomily at Pierre, who turned
the Arbát and got a powder and some pills in a pretty box for a ruble
night, so dark that the coachman could not see the carriage pole.
From the time of his marriage Sónya had lived in his house. Before
did not wish to confess.

to think of the impression he makes on others, but is occupied with
Mozháysk.
Prince Vasíli, who still occupied his former important posts, formed a
“Impossible!” cried Prince Andrew. “That would be too base.”
army nothing but flogging, drilling, and Military Settlements; the

in danger, it was said that Smolénsk had surrendered, that Napoleon had
dissatisfaction at the slowness of the pursuit and at the mistakes made

to hold him down. One large, white, plump leg twitched rapidly all

the far distance finds what he sought at his very feet. All his life

at her reflection in the glass. “She flatters me,” thought the
horse; another was perched up behind an hussar with his arms round him;
the cannon balls and shells all flew overhead, but sometimes several men
Andrew blushed, as he often did now—Natásha particularly liked it in
the fire and the soldiers looked at him in silence.
the first impression of him, as of something round, was fully confirmed:
appointment on the headquarters staff, left for Turkey.
stronger than a pawn, and two pawns are always stronger than one, while
grateful to her benefactors, and so faithfully, unchangingly, and
suddenly changed to one of horror. The French were supposed to be a
soldier’s cap, and bast shoes—was round. His head was quite round, his

memorable an impression on him. In the forest the harness bells sounded

“We shall probably advance,” replied Bolkónski, evidently reluctant
    CHAPTER XXVII
Having ridden in the smoke past the Sixth Corps, behind the artillery
Having once more entered into the definite conditions of this regimental
the field of Borodinó.
ruined or not?”
ex-captain of police, was saying angrily:
together as they approached it as if passing through a funnel. At last
on a hot dish.

ill-suited to the family circle of which Pierre was almost a member.
“It is too late now, it’s done; besides I love her,” thought
From the bridge they had a view of endless lines of moving baggage
    CHAPTER XIV
were said to have shown themselves was even dangerous.

Natásha had married in the early spring of 1813, and in 1820 already had
Great Catherine! As you know, I am quite indifferent to politics, but
him; but most of all, he felt joyful that the moment had come when he
midst of the momentary silence that ensued, “Count! One God is above us
“Why?”

Moscow are elated by enthusiasm for our adored Emperor.
and scarves strewn all about her, gazing fixedly at the floor and
Moscow; then he suddenly ran away from Moscow, and the Emperor
Kutúzov seemed preoccupied and did not listen to what the general was
Freedom is the thing examined. Inevitability is what examines. Freedom
huge family coach in which she had traveled to Vorónezh, a semiopen

spoke. Kutúzov looked down at his own legs, occasionally glancing at the
But the princess did not listen to him.
If the man whose actions we are considering is on a very low stage of

added stinginess.
friendship with the father whom Nicholas could not remember—all this
“What rubbish sometimes enters one’s head!” thought Prince Andrew,
reason for not carrying out his intention to enter the army lay in the

“You’re not the same at all,” he said.
    CHAPTER XIII
battery when two balls, and then four more, fell among our guns, one
officer in charge of transport was beating the soldier who was driving
Prince Andrew replied that he was not on his Serene Highness’ staff
this time.
paces, and Nicholas could clearly distinguish every detail of his
clear but windy evening.
men, one of whom he knew. After greeting Pierre they continued their
repulsive than any other, because he imagines that he knows the
marry anyone, but will be a dancer. Only don’t tell anyone.”
defense—as much as to say: ‘Heaven is with us, but heaven help you

drew nearer to our Uhlans and the French dragoons who galloped after
Andrew gave you complete freedom—if it is really so; but I don’t
Prince Andrew, beginning to understand that his news of the battle
alone with him in the dark temple it seemed to me that he was smiling

had reached Braunau at the same time, was in splendid condition. There
my mind gave him the most malevolent and bitter replies. I recollected
him by the arm, “I believe that intervention will be stronger than
He could not rejoin the army where he would have been made colonel at
My leisure then, and my old age, would have been devoted, in company


by order of the Higher Command. If they noticed anything remarkable
indulgence and silly talk she was spoiling little Prince Nicholas. The

any great change and that all the danger he spoke of existed only in his
“Well, they say,” continued the adjutant with the same smile, “that
him something of Weyrother, Mack, and Schmidt, and many other German
directed toward arousing in the masses his own feeling of patriotic
“I commanded a squadron,” replied Repnín.
self-confidence, while his body was thin and weak. His eyes, nose, and
baggage train should orders come for it to move, and to talk to no one
Pierre’s animation that his visit had been interesting and that he had
Natásha’s looks, as everyone told her, had improved in the country,
luxurious drawing room, went to the balcony door, took hold of the
step.
then choose a middle course. They insisted on the retention of the camp
rolling them up. Márya Dmítrievna always spoke in Russian.

regiment. The faces of these young people, especially those who were
him. All he saw about him merged into a general impression of naked,
commanding both sides of the Danube, so that should the enemy not
to who he might be—perhaps a very important person—and hostility as a
The doctor entered. Prince Andrew went out and, meeting Princess Mary,
everything became clear, and in all corners of Moscow the same things
to me? I love him alone, him, him, with that face and those eyes, with




and that Alexander had acted on it. What would then have become of the

her of his intention to persuade Pierre to stay with them till spring.

Among the opinions and voices in this immense, restless, brilliant,
a small cloud had scattered some raindrops lightly, sprinkling the road
perfect peace of mind in spite of my wife’s absence. At the time I
rumors, assuring everyone that nothing had happened except that his

came to these balls with an air of condescension and found them most
“They want to run to see how they have wounded it. Wait and we shall

popular feeling, and had grown so used to it, that the necessity of
“No, tell them to harness.”

her that summer for the first time with cruel clearness. She tried to
for him by a new light. He understood that latent heat (as they say in
his study and showed them his choice collection of Turkish pipes. From
soldiers, taking advantage of the stoppage and congestion, turned back
weight.


But there was nothing to come. There was no joy in life, yet life was
three sides. The most vigorous attack came from an old acquaintance,
The intention was to make a stand at the Drissa camp, but Paulucci,
what chance has Michael Kutúzov? No, my dear boy,” he continued,

more profound, more skillful, or more admirable,” and enters into a
distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the
to the fire sent to ask his colonel whether he would not take a French
He left in order not to obstruct the commander in chief’s undivided
printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING with public
secretary rather than commander in the army. My removal from the army
whole neighborhood in powder smoke.
had not yet begun. Not wishing to agree to Dolgorúkov’s demand to
“There now, you wish to liberate your serfs,” he continued; “that
In the vicinity of Boguchárovo were large villages belonging to the
this same irresolute and undiscerning Dokhtúrov—Kutúzov hastening to
continued to explain how by exchanging into the Guards he had already
impossible, she did not ask and did not want to know: it was her duty,
him that he was quite different and distinct from those other retired
“Buonaparte himself!... Just listen to the fool, what he doesn’t
“A whole year!” Natásha repeated suddenly, only now realizing that
ethnographic, or economic conditions, then the free will of those
words to the soldiers who were carrying him, now with his eyes fixed
is, and can be, no cause of an historical event except the one cause of
the smoke were moving, at times as if the troops moved. Sometimes shouts
manner and with an obvious effort to remember.

arranging a dinner in honor of Prince Bagratión at the English Club.
Princess Mary spent half of every day with little Nicholas, watching

with exaggerated politeness.
did go down to see him, Princess Mary imagined the words he would say
1805, 1807, and 1809—precede the great westward movement; there is the
off—and this is what comes of it!” said Prince Andrew in an
could be executed, for it was quite out of touch with the facts of the
the earth. Perhaps the red spot was a fire, or it might be the eye of an
Murat’s detachment and the battle had not yet begun. In Bagratión’s
cleaned pairs with spurs had just been placed by the wall. The servants
nearer in disorderly crowds came the Uhlans and the French dragoons
landowner’s house.
see Princess Mary the day before and had there met—“Whom do you think?
after dinner. He called Natásha and asked her what was the matter.

“I am waiting, Your Majesty,” answered Kutúzov, bending forward
latter.
raised her in her own esteem and in that of others, and so made her more
Bogdánovna advised Prince Andrew to leave the room.


if the black spaces were clouds. Sometimes the sky seemed to be rising


    CHAPTER VII
esteem personally. Armfeldt virulently hated Napoleon and was a general
